PDF PAGE 47
 
 
Middle School Physical Science 
 
Students in middle school continue to develop understanding of four core ideas in the physical 
sciences. The middle school performance expectations in the Physical Sciences build on the K – 
5 ideas and capabilities to allow learners to explain phenomena central to the physical sciences 
but also to the life sciences and earth and space science. The performance expectations in 
physical science blend the core ideas with scientific and engineering practices and crosscutting 
concepts to support students in developing useable knowledge to explain real world phenomena 
in the physical, biological, and earth and space sciences. In the physical sciences, performance 
expectations at the middle school level focus on students developing understanding of several 
scientific practices. These include developing and using models, planning and conducting 
investigations, analyzing and interpreting data, using mathematical and computational thinking, 
and constructing explanations; and to use these practices to demonstrate understanding of the 
core ideas. Students are also expected to demonstrate understanding of several of engineering 
practices including design and evaluation.   
 
The performance expectations in PS1: Matter and its Interactions help students to 
formulate an answer to the question, “How do atomic and molecular interactions explain the 
properties of matter that we see and feel?” by building understanding of what occurs at the 
atomic and molecular scale. In middle school, the PS1 Disciplinary Core Idea from the NRC 
Framework is broken down into two sub-ideas:  the structure and properties of matter, and 
chemical reactions.  By the end of middle school, students will be able to apply understanding 
that pure substances have characteristic physical and chemical properties and are made from a 
single type of atom or molecule. They will be able to provide molecular level accounts to explain 
states of matters and changes between states, that chemical reactions involve regrouping of 
atoms to form new substances, and that atoms rearrange during chemical reactions. Students 
are also able to apply an understanding of the design and the process of optimization in 
engineering to chemical reaction systems. The crosscutting concepts of patterns; cause and 
effect; scale, proportion and quantity; energy and matter; structure and function; 
interdependence of science, engineering, and technology; and influence of science, engineering 
and technology on society and the natural world are called out as organizing concepts for these 
disciplinary core ideas. In the PS1 performance expectations, students are expected to 
demonstrate proficiency in developing and using models, analyzing and interpreting data, 
designing solutions, and obtaining, evaluating, and communicating information. Students use 
these scientific and engineering practices to demonstrate understanding of the disciplinary core 
ideas. 
 
The performance expectations in PS2: Motion and Stability: Forces and Interactions 
focuses on helping students understand ideas related to why some objects will keep moving, 
why objects fall to the ground and why some materials are attracted to each other while others 
are not.  Students answer the question, “How can one describe physical interactions between 
objects and within systems of objects?” At the middle school level, the PS2 Disciplinary Core 
Idea from the NRC Framework is broken down into two sub-ideas:  Forces and Motion and 
Types of interactions. By the end of middle school, students will be able to apply Newton’s Third 
Law of Motion to relate forces to explain the motion of objects. Students also apply ideas about 
gravitational, electrical, and magnetic forces to explain a variety of phenomena including 
beginning ideas about why some materials attract each other while others repel. In particular, 
students will develop understanding that gravitational interactions are always attractive but that 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
47 of 103

PDF PAGE 48
 
 
electrical and magnetic forces can be both attractive and negative. Students also develop ideas 
that objects can exert forces on each other even though the objects are not in contact, through 
fields. Students are also able to apply an engineering practice and concept to solve a problem 
caused when objects collide. The crosscutting concepts of cause and effect; system and system 
models; stability and change; and the influence of science, engineering, and technology on 
society and the natural world serve as organizing concepts for these disciplinary core ideas. In 
the PS2 performance expectations, students are expected to demonstrate proficiency in asking 
questions, planning and carrying out investigations, and designing solutions, and engaging in 
argument; and to use these practices to demonstrate understanding of the core ideas.  
 
The performance expectations in PS3: Energy help students formulate an answer to the 
question, “How can energy be transferred from one object or system to another?” At the middle 
school level, the PS3 Disciplinary Core Idea from the NRC Framework is broken down into four 
sub-core ideas:  Definitions of Energy, Conservation of Energy and Energy Transfer, the 
Relationship between Energy and Forces, and Energy in Chemical Process and Everyday Life.  
Students develop their understanding of important qualitative ideas about energy including that 
the interactions of objects can be explained and predicted using the concept of transfer of 
energy from one object or system of objects to another, and the total change of energy in any 
system is always equal to the total energy transferred into or out of the system. Students 
understand that objects that are moving have kinetic energy and that objects may also contain 
stored (potential) energy, depending on their relative positions. Students will also come to know 
the difference between energy and temperature, and begin to develop an understanding of the 
relationship between force and energy. Students are also able to apply an understanding of 
design to the process of energy transfer. The crosscutting concepts of scale, proportion, and 
quantity; systems and system models; and energy are called out as organizing concepts for 
these disciplinary core ideas. The performance expectations in PS3 expect students to 
demonstrate proficiency in developing and using models, planning investigations, analyzing and 
interpreting data, and designing solutions, and engaging in argument from evidence; and to use 
these practices to demonstrate understanding of the core ideas in PS3.  
 
The performance expectations in PS4: Waves and Their Applications in Technologies for 
Information Transfer help students formulate an answer to the question, “What are the 
characteristic properties of waves and how can they be used?” At the middle school level, the 
PS4 Disciplinary Core Idea from the NRC Framework is broken down into Wave Properties, 
Electromagnetic Radiation, and Information Technologies and Instrumentation. Students are 
able to describe and predict characteristic properties and behaviors of waves when the waves 
interact with matter. Students can apply an understanding of waves as a means to send digital 
information. The crosscutting concepts of patterns and structure and function are used as 
organizing concepts for these disciplinary core ideas. The performance expectations in PS4 
focus on students demonstrating proficiency in developing and using models, using 
mathematical thinking, and obtaining, evaluating and communicating information; and to use 
these practices to demonstrate understanding of the core ideas. 
 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
48 of 103

PDF PAGE 49
MS-PS1  Matter and Its Interactions 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practice or  Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
MS-PS1     Matter and Its Interactions 
Students who demonstrate understanding can:   
MS-PS1-1. Develop models to describe the atomic composition of simple molecules and extended structures.  [Clarification 
Statement:  Emphasis is on developing models of molecules that vary in complexity. Examples of simple molecules could include  ammonia and methanol. Examples 
of extended structures could include sodium chloride or diamonds. Examples of molecular-level models could include drawings, 3D ball and stick structures , or 
computer representations showing different molecules with different types of atoms.]  [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include valence electrons and 
bonding energy, discussing the ionic nature of subunits of complex structures, or a complete depiction of all individual atoms in a complex molecule or extended 
structure.] 
MS-PS1-2. Analyze and interpret data on the properties of substances before and after the substances interact to determine 
if a chemical reaction has occurred.  [Clarification Statement:  Examples of reactions could include burning sugar or steel wool, fat reacting with 
sodium hydroxide, and mixing zinc with hydrogen chloride.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment is limited to analysis of the following properties:  density, melting 
point, boiling point, solubility, flammability, and odor.] 
MS-PS1-3. Gather and make sense of information to describe that synthetic materials come from natural resources and 
impact society.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on natural resources that undergo a chemical process to form the synthetic material. E xamples of new 
materials could include new medicine, foods, and alternative fuels.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment is limited to qualitative information.]  
MS-PS1-4. Develop a model that predicts and describes changes in particle motion, temperature, and state of a pure 
substance when thermal energy is added or removed.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on qualitative molecular-level models of solids, 
liquids, and gases to show that adding or removing thermal energy increases or decreases kinetic energy of the particles unti l a change of state occurs. Examples of 
models could include drawings and diagrams. Examples of particles could include molecules or inert atoms. Examples of pure substances could include water, carbon 
dioxide, and helium.] 
MS-PS1-5. Develop and use a model to describe how the total number of atoms does not change in a chemical reaction and 
thus mass is conserved.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on law of conservation of matter and on physical models or drawings, including digital  
forms, that represent atoms.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include the use of atomic masses, balancing symbolic equa tions, or intermolecular 
forces.]   
MS-PS1-6. Undertake a design project to construct, test, and modify a device that either releases or absorbs thermal energy 
by chemical processes.*  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on the design, controlling the transfer of  energy to the environment, and modification of a 
device using factors such as type and concentration of a substance. Examples of d esigns could involve chemical reactions such as dissolving ammonium chloride or 
calcium chloride.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment is limited to the criteria of amount, time, and temperature of substance in testing the device.] 
The performance expectations above were developed using the following elements from the NRC document  A Framework for K-12 Science Education: 
 
Science and Engineering Practices 
Developing and Using Models 
Modeling in 6–8 builds on K–5 and progresses to 
developing, using and revising models to describe, test, 
and predict more abstract phenomena and design 
systems. 
▪ Develop a model to predict and/or describe 
phenomena. (MS-PS1-1),(MS-PS1-4) 
▪ Develop a model to describe unobservable 
mechanisms. (MS-PS1-5) 
Analyzing and Interpreting Data 
Analyzing data in 6–8 builds on K–5 and progresses to 
extending quantitative analysis to investigations, 
distinguishing between correlation and causation, and 
basic statistical techniques of data and error analysis. 
▪ Analyze and interpret data to determine similarities 
and differences in findings. (MS-PS1-2) 
Constructing Explanations and Designing 
Solutions 
Constructing explanations and designing solutions in 6–8 
builds on K–5 experiences and progresses to include 
constructing explanations and designing solutions 
supported by multiple sources of evidence consistent with 
scientific knowledge, principles, and theories. 
▪ Undertake a design project, engaging in the design 
cycle, to construct and/or implement a solution that 
meets specific design criteria and constraints. (MS-
PS1-6) 
Obtaining, Evaluating, and Communicating 
Information  
Obtaining, evaluating, and communicating information in 
6–8 builds on K–5 and progresses to evaluating the merit 
and validity of ideas and methods. 
▪ Gather, read, and synthesize information from 
multiple appropriate sources and assess the 
credibility, accuracy, and possible bias of each 
publication and methods used, and describe how 
they are supported or not supported by evidence. 
(MS-PS1-3) 
--------------------------------------------- 
Connections to Nature of Science 
 
Scientific Knowledge is Based on Empirical 
Evidence 
▪ Science knowledge is based upon logical and 
conceptual connections between evidence and 
 
Disciplinary Core Ideas 
PS1.A:  Structure and Properties of Matter 
▪ Substances are made from different types of atoms, which 
combine with one another in various ways. Atoms form 
molecules that range in size from two to thousands of atoms. 
(MS-PS1-1) 
▪ Each pure substance has characteristic physical and chemical 
properties (for any bulk quantity under given conditions) that 
can be used to identify it. (MS-PS1-2),(MS-PS1-3) 
▪ Gases and liquids are made of molecules or inert atoms that are 
moving about relative to each other. (MS-PS1-4) 
▪ In a liquid, the molecules are constantly in contact with others; 
in a gas, they are widely spaced except when they happen to 
collide. In a solid, atoms are closely spaced and may vibrate in 
position but do not change relative locations. (MS-PS1-4) 
▪ Solids may be formed from molecules, or they may be extended 
structures with repeating subunits (e.g., crystals). (MS-PS1-1) 
▪ The changes of state that occur with variations in temperature 
or pressure can be described and predicted using these models 
of matter. (MS-PS1-4) 
PS1.B:  Chemical Reactions 
▪ Substances react chemically in characteristic ways.  In a 
chemical process, the atoms that make up the original 
substances are regrouped into different molecules, and these 
new substances have different properties from those of the 
reactants. (MS-PS1-2),(MS-PS1-3),(MS-PS1-5) 
▪ The total number of each type of atom is conserved, and thus 
the mass does not change. (MS-PS1-5) 
▪ Some chemical reactions release energy, others store energy. 
(MS-PS1-6) 
PS3.A:  Definitions of Energy 
▪ The term “heat” as used in everyday language refers both to 
thermal energy (the motion of atoms or molecules within a 
substance) and the transfer of that thermal energy from one 
object to another.  In science, heat is used only for this second 
meaning; it refers to the energy transferred due to the 
temperature difference between two objects. (secondary to MS-
PS1-4) 
▪ The temperature of a system is proportional to the average 
internal kinetic energy and potential energy per atom or 
molecule (whichever is the appropriate building block for the 
system’s material).  The details of that relationship depend on 
the type of atom or molecule and the interactions among the 
atoms in the material. Temperature is not a direct measure of a 
system's total thermal energy. The total thermal energy 
(sometimes called the total internal energy) of a system depends 
 
Crosscutting Concepts 
Patterns 
▪ Macroscopic patterns are related to the 
nature of microscopic and atomic-level 
structure. (MS-PS1-2) 
Cause and Effect  
▪ Cause and effect relationships may be used to 
predict phenomena in natural or designed 
systems. (MS-PS1-4) 
Scale, Proportion, and Quantity 
▪ Time, space, and energy phenomena can be 
observed at various scales using models to 
study systems that are too large or too small. 
(MS-PS1-1) 
Energy and Matter  
▪ Matter is conserved because atoms are 
conserved in physical and chemical processes. 
(MS-PS1-5) 
▪ The transfer of energy can be tracked as 
energy flows through a designed or natural 
system. (MS-PS1-6) 
Structure and Function 
▪ Structures can be designed to serve particular 
functions by taking into account properties of 
different materials, and how materials can be 
shaped and used. (MS-PS1-3) 
 
------------------------------------------------ 
Connections to Engineering, Technology, 
and Applications of Science 
 
Interdependence of Science, Engineering, 
and Technology 
▪ Engineering advances have led to important 
discoveries in virtually every field of science, 
and scientific discoveries have led to the 
development of entire industries and 
engineered systems. (MS-PS1-3) 
Influence of Science, Engineering and 
Technology on Society and the Natural 
World 
▪ The uses of technologies and any limitations 
on their use are driven by individual or 
societal needs, desires, and values; by the 
findings of scientific research; and by 
differences in such factors as climate, natural 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
49 of 103

PDF PAGE 50
MS-PS1  Matter and Its Interactions 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practice or  Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
explanations. (MS-PS1-2) 
Science Models, Laws, Mechanisms, and Theories 
Explain Natural Phenomena 
▪ Laws are regularities or mathematical descriptions of 
natural phenomena. (MS-PS1-5) 
jointly on the temperature, the total number of atoms in the 
system, and the state of the material. (secondary to MS-PS1-4) 
ETS1.B:  Developing Possible Solutions 
▪ A solution needs to be tested, and then modified on the basis of 
the test results, in order to improve it. (secondary to MS-PS1-6) 
ETS1.C:  Optimizing the Design Solution 
▪ Although one design may not perform the best across all tests, 
identifying the characteristics of the design that performed the 
best in each test can provide useful information for the redesign 
process—that is, some of the characteristics may be 
incorporated into the new design. (secondary to MS-PS1-6) 
▪ The iterative process of testing the most promising solutions and 
modifying what is proposed on the basis of the test results leads 
to greater refinement and ultimately to an optimal solution. 
(secondary to MS-PS1-6) 
resources, and economic conditions. Thus 
technology use varies from region to region 
and over time. (MS-PS1-3) 
 
 
Connections to other DCIs in this grade-band:  MS.PS3.D (MS-PS1-2),(MS-PS1-6); MS.LS1.C (MS-PS1-2),(MS-PS1-5); MS.LS2.A (MS-PS1-3); MS.LS2.B (MS-PS1-5); MS.LS4.D 
(MS-PS1-3); MS.ESS2.A (MS-PS1-2),(MS-PS1-5); MS.ESS2.C (MS-PS1-1),(MS-PS1-4); MS.ESS3.A (MS-PS1-3); MS.ESS3.C (MS-PS1-3) 
Articulation across grade-bands:  5.PS1.A (MS-PS1-1); 5.PS1.B (MS-PS1-2),(MS-PS1-5); HS.PS1.A (MS-PS1-1),(MS-PS1-3),(MS-PS1-4),(MS-PS1-6); HS.PS1.B (MS-PS1-2),(MS-PS1-
4),(MS-PS1-5),(MS-PS1-6); HS.PS3.A (MS-PS1-4),(MS-PS1-6); HS.PS3.B (MS-PS1-6); HS.PS3.D (MS-PS1-6); HS.LS2.A (MS-PS1-3); HS.LS4.D (MS-PS1-3); HS.ESS1.A (MS-PS1-
1); HS.ESS3.A (MS-PS1-3) 
Common Core State Standards Connections:  
ELA/Literacy –  
RST.6-8.1  Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of science and technical texts, attending to the precise details of explan ations or descriptions (MS-PS1-2),(MS-
PS1-3) 
RST.6-8.3  Follow precisely a multistep procedure when carrying out experiments, taking measurements, or performing technical tasks. (MS -PS1-6) 
RST.6-8.7  Integrate quantitative or technical information expressed in words in a text with a version of that information expressed visually (e.g., in a flowchart, diagram, 
model, graph, or table). (MS-PS1-1),(MS-PS1-2),(MS-PS1-4),(MS-PS1-5) 
WHST.6-8.7  Conduct short research projects to answer a question (including a self -generated question), drawing on several sources and generating additional related, 
focused questions that allow for multiple avenues of exploration. (MS-PS1-6) 
WHST.6-8.8   Gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources, using search terms effectively; assess the credibility and accuracy of each source; and quote 
or paraphrase the data and conclusions of others while avoiding plagiarism and following a standard format for citation.  (MS-PS1-3) 
Mathematics –  
MP.2 Reason abstractly and quantitatively.  (MS-PS1-1),(MS-PS1-2),(MS-PS1-5) 
MP.4 Model with mathematics. (MS-PS1-1),(MS-PS1-5) 
6.RP.A.3 Use ratio and rate reasoning to solve real-world and mathematical problems. (MS-PS1-1),(MS-PS1-2),(MS-PS1-5) 
6.NS.C.5 Understand that positive and negative numbers are used together to describe quantities having opposite directions or values (e.g., temperature above/below  
zero, elevation above/below sea level, credits/debits, positive/negative electric charge); use positive and negative numbers to represent quantities in real-world 
contexts, explaining the meaning of 0 in each situation. (MS-PS1-4) 
8.EE.A.3 Use numbers expressed in the form of a single digit times an integer power of 10 to estimate very large or very small quantit ies, and to express how many times 
as much one is than the other. (MS-PS1-1) 
6.SP.B.4 Display numerical data in plots on a number line, including dot plots, histograms, and box plots.  (MS-PS1-2) 
6.SP.B.5 Summarize numerical data sets in relation to their context (MS-PS1-2) 
 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
50 of 103

PDF PAGE 51
MS-PS2  Motion and Stability:  Forces and Interactions 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practi ce or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
MS-PS2     Motion and Stability:  Forces and Interactions 
Students who demonstrate understanding can: 
MS-PS2-1. Apply Newton’s Third Law to design a solution to a problem involving the motion of two colliding objects.*   
[Clarification Statement:  Examples of practical problems could include the impact of collisions between two cars, between a c ar and stationary objects, and 
between a meteor and a space vehicle.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment is limited to vertical or horizontal interactions in one dimension.] 
MS-PS2-2. Plan an investigation to provide evidence that the change in an object’s motion depends on the sum of the 
forces on the object and the mass of the object.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on balanced (Newton’s First Law) and unbalanced 
forces in a system, qualitative comparisons of forces, mass and changes in motion (Newton’s Second Law), frame of reference, and specification of units.] 
[Assessment Boundary:  Assessment is limited to forces and changes in motion in one-dimension in an inertial reference frame and to change in one variable at a 
time. Assessment does not include the use of trigonometry.] 
MS-PS2-3. Ask questions about data to determine the factors that affect the strength of electric and magnetic forces.  
[Clarification Statement:  Examples of devices that use electric and magnetic forces could include electromagnets, electric m otors, or generators. Examples of 
data could include the effect of the number of turns of wire on the strength of an electromagnet, or the effect of increasing the number or strength of magnets 
on the speed of an electric motor.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment about questions that require quantitative answers is li mited to proportional reasoning and 
algebraic thinking.] 
MS-PS2-4. Construct and present arguments using evidence to support the claim that gravitational interactions are 
attractive and depend on the masses of interacting objects.  [Clarification Statement:  Examples of evidence for arguments could 
include data generated from simulations or digital tools; and charts displaying mass, strength of interaction, distance from the Sun, and orbital periods of objects 
within the solar system.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include Newton’s Law of Gravitation or Kepler’s Laws.] 
MS-PS2-5. Conduct an investigation and evaluate the experimental design to provide evidence that fields exist between 
objects exerting forces on each other even though the objects are not in contact.  [Clarification Statement:  Examples of this 
phenomenon could include the interactions of magnets, electrically-charged strips of tape, and electrically-charged pith balls. Examples of investigations could 
include first-hand experiences or simulations.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment is limited to electric and magnetic fields, and limited to qualitative evidence 
for the existence of fields.]  
The performance expectations above were developed using the following elements from the NRC document  A Framework for K-12 Science Education: 
 
Science and Engineering Practices 
Asking Questions and Defining Problems 
Asking questions and defining problems in grades 6–8 builds from grades 
K–5 experiences and progresses to specifying relationships between 
variables, and clarifying arguments and models. 
▪ Ask questions that can be investigated within the scope of the 
classroom, outdoor environment, and museums and other public 
facilities with available resources and, when appropriate, frame a 
hypothesis based on observations and scientific principles. (MS-PS2-3) 
Planning and Carrying Out Investigations 
Planning and carrying out investigations to answer questions or test 
solutions to problems in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences and progresses to 
include investigations that use multiple variables and provide evidence to 
support explanations or design solutions. 
▪ Plan an investigation individually and collaboratively, and in the design: 
identify independent and dependent variables and controls, what tools 
are needed to do the gathering, how measurements will be recorded, 
and how many data are needed to support a claim. (MS-PS2-2) 
▪ Conduct an investigation and evaluate the experimental design to 
produce data to serve as the basis for evidence that can meet the 
goals of the investigation. (MS-PS2-5) 
Constructing Explanations and Designing Solutions  
Constructing explanations and designing solutions in 6–8 builds on K–5 
experiences and progresses to include constructing explanations and 
designing solutions supported by multiple sources of evidence consi stent 
with scientific ideas, principles, and theories. 
▪ Apply scientific ideas or principles to design an object, tool, process or 
system. (MS-PS2-1) 
Engaging in Argument from Evidence 
Engaging in argument from evidence in 6–8 builds from K–5 experiences 
and progresses to constructing a convincing argument that supports or 
refutes claims for either explanations or solutions about the natural and 
designed world.  
▪ Construct and present oral and written arguments supported by 
empirical evidence and scientific reasoning to support or refute an 
explanation or a model for a phenomenon or a solution to a problem. 
(MS-PS2-4) 
 
------------------------------------------------------ 
Connections to Nature of Science  
 
Scientific Knowledge is Based on Empirical E vidence 
▪ Science knowledge is based upon logical and conceptual connections 
between evidence and explanations. (MS-PS2-2),(MS-PS2-4) 
 
Disciplinary Core Ideas 
PS2.A:  Forces and Motion 
▪ For any pair of interacting objects, the force 
exerted by the first object on the second object is 
equal in strength to the force that the second 
object exerts on the first, but in the opposite 
direction (Newton’s third law). (MS-PS2-1) 
▪ The motion of an object is determined by the sum 
of the forces acting on it; if the total force on the 
object is not zero, its motion will change. The 
greater the mass of the object, the greater the 
force needed to achieve the same change in 
motion. For any given object, a larger force causes 
a larger change in motion. (MS-PS2-2) 
▪ All positions of objects and the directions of forces 
and motions must be described in an arbitrarily 
chosen reference frame and arbitrarily chosen units 
of size. In order to share information with other 
people, these choices must also be shared. (MS-
PS2-2) 
PS2.B:  Types of Interactions 
▪ Electric and magnetic (electromagnetic) forces can 
be attractive or repulsive, and their sizes depend on 
the magnitudes of the charges, currents, or 
magnetic strengths involved and on the distances 
between the interacting objects. (MS-PS2-3) 
▪ Gravitational forces are always attractive. There is a 
gravitational force between any two masses, but it 
is very small except when one or both of the 
objects have large mass—e.g., Earth and the sun. 
(MS-PS2-4) 
▪ Forces that act at a distance (electric, magnetic, 
and gravitational) can be explained by fields that 
extend through space and can be mapped by their 
effect on a test object (a charged object, or a ball, 
respectively). (MS-PS2-5) 
 
 
Crosscutting Concepts 
Cause and Effect 
▪ Cause and effect relationships may be 
used to predict phenomena in natural or 
designed systems. (MS-PS2-3),(MS-PS2-
5) 
Systems and System Models 
▪ Models can be used to represent 
systems and their interactions—such as 
inputs, processes and outputs—and 
energy and matter flows within 
systems. (MS-PS2-1),(MS-PS2-4),  
Stability and Change 
▪ Explanations of stability and change in 
natural or designed systems can be 
constructed by examining the changes 
over time and forces at different scales. 
(MS-PS2-2) 
 
---------------------------------------------- 
Connections to Engineering, Technology, 
and Applications of Science 
 
Influence of Science, Engineering, and 
Technology on Society and the Natural 
World 
▪ The uses of technologies and any 
limitations on their use are driven by 
individual or societal needs, desires, and 
values; by the findings of scientific 
research; and by differences in such 
factors as climate, natural resources, 
and economic conditions. (MS-PS2-1) 
 
 
Connections to other DCIs in this grade-band:  MS.PS3.A (MS-PS2-2); MS.PS3.B (MS-PS2-2); MS.PS3.C (MS-PS2-1); MS.ESS1.A (MS-PS2-4); MS.ESS1.B (MS-PS2-4); 
MS.ESS2.C (MS-PS2-2),(MS-PS2-4) 
Articulation across grade-bands:  3.PS2.A (MS-PS2-1),(MS-PS2-2); 3.PS2.B (MS-PS2-3),(MS-PS2-5); 5.PS2.B (MS-PS2-4); HS.PS2.A (MS-PS2-1),(MS-PS2-2); HS.PS2.B (MS-PS2-
3),(MS-PS2-4),(MS-PS2-5); HS.PS3.A (MS-PS2-5); HS.PS3.B (MS-PS2-2),(MS-PS2-5); HS.PS3.C (MS-PS2-5); HS.ESS1.B (MS-PS2-2),(MS-PS2-4) 
Common Core State Standards Connections:  
ELA/Literacy –  
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
51 of 103

PDF PAGE 52
MS-PS2  Motion and Stability:  Forces and Interactions 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practi ce or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
RST.6-8.1  Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of science and technical texts, attending to the precise details of explan ations or descriptions (MS-PS2-1),(MS-
PS2-3) 
RST.6-8.3     Follow precisely a multistep procedure when carrying out experiments, taking measurements, or performing technical tasks. (MS-PS2-1),(MS-PS2-2),(MS-PS2-
5) 
WHST.6-8.1  Write arguments focused on discipline-specific content. (MS-PS2-4) 
WHST.6-8.7               Conduct short research projects to answer a question (including a self -generated question), drawing on several sources and generating additional related, 
focused questions that allow for multiple avenues of exploration. (MS-PS2-1),(MS-PS2-2),(MS-PS2-5) 
Mathematics –  
MP.2  Reason abstractly and quantitatively. (MS-PS2-1),(MS-PS2-2),(MS-PS2-3) 
6.NS.C.5 Understand that positive and negative numbers are used together to describe quantities having opposite directions or values; use positive and negative 
numbers to represent quantities in real-world contexts, explaining the meaning of 0 in each situation. (MS-PS2-1) 
6.EE.A.2 Write, read, and evaluate expressions in which letters stand for numbers. (MS-PS2-1),(MS-PS2-2) 
7.EE.B.3 Solve multi-step real-life and mathematical problems posed with positive and negative rational numbers in any form, using tools strategically. Appl y properties 
of operations to calculate with numbers in any form; convert between forms as appropriate; and a ssess the reasonableness of answers using mental 
computation and estimation strategies. (MS-PS2-1),(MS-PS2-2) 
7.EE.B.4 Use variables to represent quantities in a real-world or mathematical problem, and construct simple equations and inequalities to solve p roblems by reasoning 
about the quantities. (MS-PS2-1),(MS-PS2-2) 
 
 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
52 of 103

PDF PAGE 53
MS-PS3  Energy 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practi ce or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
MS-PS3  Energy 
Students who demonstrate understanding can: 
MS-PS3-1. Construct and interpret graphical displays of data to describe the relationships of kinetic energy to the mass of an 
object and to the speed of an object.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on descriptive relationships between kinetic energy and mass separately 
from kinetic energy and speed. Examples could include riding a bicycle at different speeds, rolling different sizes of rocks downhill, and getting hit by a wiffle ball 
versus a tennis ball.] 
MS-PS3-2. Develop a model to describe that when the arrangement of objects interacting at a distance changes, different 
amounts of potential energy are stored in the system.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on relative amounts of potential energy, not on 
calculations of potential energy. Examples of objects within systems interacting at varying distances could include:  the Earth and either a roller coaster cart at varying 
positions on a hill or objects at varying heights on shelves, changing the direction/orientation of a magnet, and a balloon w ith static electrical charge being brought 
closer to a classmate’s hair. Examples of models could include representations, diagrams, pictures, and written descriptions of systems.] [Assessment Boundary:  
Assessment is limited to two objects and electric, magnetic, and gravitational interactions. ]  
MS-PS3-3. Apply scientific principles to design, construct, and test a device that either minimizes or maximizes thermal 
energy transfer.*  [Clarification Statement:  Examples of devices could include an insulated box, a solar cooker, and a Styrofoam cup.] [Assessment 
Boundary:  Assessment does not include calculating the total amount of thermal energy transferred.]  
MS-PS3-4. Plan an investigation to determine the relationships among the energy transferred, the type of matter, the mass, 
and the change in the average kinetic energy of the particles as measured by the temperature of the sample.   
[Clarification Statement:  Examples of experiments could include comparing final water temperatures after different masses of ice melted in the same vol ume of water 
with the same initial temperature, the temperature change of samples of different materials with the same mass as the y cool or heat in the environment, or the same 
material with different masses when a specific amount of energy is added. ] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include calculating the total amount of 
thermal energy transferred.] 
MS-PS3-5. Construct, use, and present arguments to support the claim that when the kinetic energy of an object changes, 
energy is transferred to or from the object.  [Clarification Statement:  Examples of empirical evidence used in arguments could include an 
inventory or other representation of the energy before and after the transfer in the form of temperature changes or motion of object.] [Assessment Boundary:  
Assessment does not include calculations of energy.] 
The performance expectations above were developed using the following elements from the NRC document A Framework for K-12 Science Education: 
 
Science and Engineering Practices 
Developing and Using Models 
Modeling in 6–8 builds on K–5 and progresses to developing, using and 
revising models to describe, test, and predict more abstract phenomena and 
design systems. 
▪ Develop a model to describe unobservable mechanisms. (MS-PS3-2) 
Planning and Carrying Out Investigations 
Planning and carrying out investigations to answer questions or test solutions 
to problems in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences and progresses to include 
investigations that use multiple variables and provide evidence to support 
explanations or design solutions. 
▪ Plan an investigation individually and collaboratively, and in the design: 
identify independent and dependent variables and controls, what tools 
are needed to do the gathering, how measurements will be recorded, and 
how many data are needed to support a claim. (MS-PS3-4) 
Analyzing and Interpreting Data  
Analyzing data in 6–8 builds on K–5 and progresses to extending quantitative 
analysis to investigations, distinguishing between correlation and causation, 
and basic statistical techniques of data and error analysis.  
▪ Construct and interpret graphical displays of data to identify linear and 
nonlinear relationships. (MS-PS3-1) 
Constructing Explanations and Designing Solutions  
Constructing explanations and designing solutions in 6–8 builds on K–5 
experiences and progresses to include constructing explanations and 
designing solutions supported by multiple sources of evidence consistent with 
scientific ideas, principles, and theories. 
▪ Apply scientific ideas or principles to design, construct, and test a design 
of an object, tool, process or system. (MS-PS3-3) 
Engaging in Argument from Evidence 
Engaging in argument from evidence in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences and 
progresses to constructing a convincing argument that supports or refutes 
claims for either explanations or solutions about the natural and designed 
worlds.  
▪ Construct, use, and present oral and written arguments supported by 
empirical evidence and scientific reasoning to support or refute an 
explanation or a model for a phenomenon. (MS-PS3-5) 
 
------------------------------------------------- 
Connections to Nature of Science  
 
Scientific Knowledge is Based on Empirical Evidence 
▪ Science knowledge is based upon logical and conceptual connections 
between evidence and explanations (MS-PS3-4),(MS-PS3-5) 
 
Disciplinary Core Ideas 
PS3.A:  Definitions of Energy  
▪ Motion energy is properly called kinetic energy; it is 
proportional to the mass of the moving object and 
grows with the square of its speed. (MS-PS3-1) 
▪ A system of objects may also contain stored 
(potential) energy, depending on their relative 
positions. (MS-PS3-2) 
▪ Temperature is a measure of the average kinetic 
energy of particles of matter. The relationship between 
the temperature and the total energy of a system 
depends on the types, states, and amounts of matter 
present. (MS-PS3-3),(MS-PS3-4) 
PS3.B:  Conservation of Energy and Energy Transfer 
▪ When the motion energy of an object changes, there 
is inevitably some other change in energy at the same 
time. (MS-PS3-5) 
▪ The amount of energy transfer needed to change the 
temperature of a matter sample by a given amount 
depends on the nature of the matter, the size of the 
sample, and the environment. (MS-PS3-4) 
▪ Energy is spontaneously transferred out of hotter 
regions or objects and into colder ones. (MS-PS3-3) 
PS3.C:  Relationship Between Energy and Forces 
▪ When two objects interact, each one exerts a force on 
the other that can cause energy to be transferred to or 
from the object. (MS-PS3-2) 
ETS1.A:  Defining and Delimiting an Engineering 
Problem 
▪ The more precisely a design task’s criteria and 
constraints can be defined, the more likely it is that 
the designed solution will be successful. Specification 
of constraints includes consideration of scientific 
principles and other relevant knowledge that is likely 
to limit possible solutions. (secondary to MS-PS3-3) 
ETS1.B:  Developing Possible Solutions 
▪ A solution needs to be tested, and then modified on 
the basis of the test results in order to improve it. 
There are systematic processes for evaluating 
solutions with respect to how well they meet criteria 
and constraints of a problem. (secondary to MS-PS3-3) 
 
 
Crosscutting Concepts 
Scale, Proportion, and Quantity 
▪ Proportional relationships (e.g. speed 
as the ratio of distance traveled to 
time taken) among different types of 
quantities provide information about 
the magnitude of properties and 
processes. (MS-PS3-1),(MS-PS3-4) 
Systems and System Models 
▪ Models can be used to represent 
systems and their interactions – such 
as inputs, processes, and outputs – 
and energy and matter flows within 
systems. (MS-PS3-2) 
Energy and Matter  
▪ Energy may take different forms 
(e.g. energy in fields, thermal 
energy, energy of motion). (MS-PS3-
5) 
▪ The transfer of energy can be 
tracked as energy flows through a 
designed or natural system. (MS-
PS3-3) 
 
 
 
Connections to other DCIs in this grade-band:  MS.PS1.A (MS-PS3-4); MS.PS1.B (MS-PS3-3); MS.PS2.A (MS-PS3-1),(MS-PS3-4),(MS-PS3-5); MS.ESS2.A (MS-PS3-3); MS.ESS2.C 
(MS-PS3-3),(MS-PS3-4); MS.ESS2.D (MS-PS3-3),(MS-PS3-4); MS.ESS3.D (MS-PS3-4) 
Articulation across grade-bands:  4.PS3.B (MS-PS3-1),(MS-PS3-3); 4.PS3.C (MS-PS3-4),(MS-PS3-5); HS.PS1.B (MS-PS3-4); HS.PS2.B (MS-PS3-2); HS.PS3.A (MS-PS3-1),(MS-PS3-
4),(MS-PS3-5); HS.PS3.B (MS-PS3-1),(MS-PS3-2),(MS-PS3-3),(MS-PS3-4),(MS-PS3-5); HS.PS3.C (MS-PS3-2) 
Common Core State Standards Connections: 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
53 of 103

PDF PAGE 54
MS-PS3  Energy 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practi ce or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
ELA/Literacy –  
RST.6-8.1  Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of science and technical texts, attending to the precise details of explanations or descriptions  (MS-PS3-1),(MS-
PS3-5) 
RST.6-8.3   Follow precisely a multistep procedure when carrying out experiments, taking measurements, or pe rforming technical tasks. (MS-PS3-3),(MS-PS3-4) 
RST.6-8.7   Integrate quantitative or technical information expressed in words in a text with a version of that information expressed vis ually (e.g., in a flowchart, diagram, 
model, graph, or table). (MS-PS3-1) 
WHST.6-8.1   Write arguments focused on discipline content. (MS-PS3-5) 
WHST.6-8.7  Conduct short research projects to answer a question (including a self -generated question), drawing on several sources and generating additional related, 
focused questions that allow for multiple avenues of exploration. (MS-PS3-3),(MS-PS3-4) 
SL.8.5  Integrate multimedia and visual displays into presentations to clarify information, strengthen claims and evidence, and add i nterest. (MS-PS3-2) 
Mathematics –  
MP.2  Reason abstractly and quantitatively. (MS-PS3-1),(MS-PS3-4),(MS-PS3-5) 
6.RP.A.1  Understand the concept of ratio and use ratio language to describe a ratio relationship between two quantities. (MS -PS3-1),(MS-PS3-5) 
6.RP.A.2  Understand the concept of a unit rate a/b associated with a ratio a:b with b ≠ 0, and use rate language in the context of a ratio relationship.  (MS-PS3-1) 
7.RP.A.2 Recognize and represent proportional relationships between quantities. (MS -PS3-1),(MS-PS3-5) 
8.EE.A.1 Know and apply the properties of integer exponents to generate equivalent numerical expressions. (MS -PS3-1) 
8.EE.A.2 Use square root and cube root symbols to represent solutions to equations of the form x2 = p and x3 = p, where p is a positiv e rational number. Evaluate square 
roots of small perfect squares and cube roots of small perfect cubes. Know that √2 is irrational.  (MS-PS3-1) 
8.F.A.3 Interpret the equation y = mx + b as defining a linear function, whose graph is a straight line; give examples of functions t hat are not linear. (MS-PS3-1),(MS-
PS3-5) 
6.SP.B.5 Summarize numerical data sets in relation to their context. (MS-PS3-4) 
 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
54 of 103

PDF PAGE 55
MS-PS4  Waves and Their Applications in Technologies for Information Transfer 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practi ce or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences.  
MS-PS4     Waves and Their Applications in Technologies for Information Transfer 
Students who demonstrate understanding can: 
MS-PS4-1. Use mathematical representations to describe a simple model for waves that includes how the amplitude of a 
wave is related to the energy in a wave.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on describing waves with both qualitative and quantitative 
thinking.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include electromagnetic waves and is limited to standard repeating waves. ]  
MS-PS4-2. Develop and use a model to describe that waves are reflected, absorbed, or transmitted through various 
materials.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on both light and mechanical waves. Examples of models could include drawings, simulations, and written 
descriptions.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment is limited to qualitative applications pertaining to light and mechanical waves. ]  
MS-PS4-3. Integrate qualitative scientific and technical information to support the claim that digitized signals are a more 
reliable way to encode and transmit information than analog signals.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on a basic 
understanding that waves can be used for communication purposes. Examples could include using fiber optic cable to transmit light pulses, radio wave pulses in wifi 
devices, and conversion of stored binary patterns to make sound or text on a computer screen.] [ Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include binary 
counting. Assessment does not include the specific mechanism of any given device.]  
The performance expectations above were developed using the following elements from the NRC document  A Framework for K-12 Science Education: 
 
Science and Engineering Practices 
Developing and Using Models 
Modeling in 6–8 builds on K–5 and progresses to developing, using, 
and revising models to describe, test, and predict more abstract 
phenomena and design systems. 
▪ Develop and use a model to describe phenomena. (MS-PS4-2) 
Using Mathematics and Computational Thinking 
Mathematical and computational thinking at the 6–8 level builds on 
K–5 and progresses to identifying patterns in large data sets and 
using mathematical concepts to support explanations and arguments.  
▪ Use mathematical representations to describe and/or support 
scientific conclusions and design solutions. (MS-PS4-1) 
Obtaining, Evaluating, and Communicating Information  
Obtaining, evaluating, and communicating information in 6-8 builds 
on K-5 and progresses to evaluating the merit and validity of ideas 
and methods. 
▪ Integrate qualitative scientific and technical information in 
written text with that contained in media and visual displays to 
clarify claims and findings. (MS-PS4-3) 
 
---------------------------------------------------- 
Connections to Nature of Science  
 
Scientific Knowledge is Based on Empirical Evidence  
▪ Science knowledge is based upon logical and conceptual 
connections between evidence and explanations. (MS-PS4-1) 
 
Disciplinary Core Ideas 
PS4.A:  Wave Properties 
▪ A simple wave has a repeating pattern with a specific 
wavelength, frequency, and amplitude. (MS-PS4-1) 
▪ A sound wave needs a medium through which it is transmitted. 
(MS-PS4-2) 
PS4.B:  Electromagnetic Radiation 
▪ When light shines on an object, it is reflected, absorbed, or 
transmitted through the object, depending on the object’s 
material and the frequency (color) of the light. (MS-PS4-2) 
▪ The path that light travels can be traced as straight lines, 
except at surfaces between different transparent materials 
(e.g., air and water, air and glass) where the light path bends. 
(MS-PS4-2) 
▪ A wave model of light is useful for explaining brightness, color, 
and the frequency-dependent bending of light at a surface 
between media. (MS-PS4-2) 
▪ However, because light can travel through space, it cannot be 
a matter wave, like sound or water waves. (MS-PS4-2) 
PS4.C:  Information Technologies and Instrumentation 
▪ Digitized signals (sent as wave pulses) are a more reliable way 
to encode and transmit information. (MS-PS4-3) 
 
 
Crosscutting Concepts 
Patterns 
▪ Graphs and charts can be used to 
identify patterns in data. (MS-PS4-
1) 
Structure and Function  
▪ Structures can be designed to serve 
particular functions by taking into 
account properties of different 
materials, and how materials can 
be shaped and used. (MS-PS4-2) 
▪ Structures can be designed to serve 
particular functions. (MS-PS4-3) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Connections to Engineering, 
Technology, and Applications of 
Science 
 
Influence of Science, Engineering, 
and Technology on Society and the 
Natural World 
▪ Technologies extend the 
measurement, exploration, 
modeling, and computational 
capacity of scientific investigations. 
(MS-PS4-3) 
----------------------------------------- 
Connections to Nature of Science  
 
Science is a Human Endeavor 
▪ Advances in technology influence 
the progress of science and science 
has influenced advances in 
technology. (MS-PS4-3) 
Connections to other DCIs in this grade-band:  MS.LS1.D (MS-PS4-2) 
Articulation across grade-bands:  4.PS3.A (MS-PS4-1); 4.PS3.B (MS-PS4-1); 4.PS4.A (MS-PS4-1); 4.PS4.B (MS-PS4-2); 4.PS4.C (MS-PS4-3); HS.PS4.A (MS-PS4-1),(MS-PS4-
2),(MS-PS4-3); HS.PS4.B (MS-PS4-1),(MS-PS4-2); HS.PS4.C (MS-PS4-3);  HS.ESS1.A (MS-PS4-2); HS.ESS2.A (MS-PS4-2); HS.ESS2.C (MS-PS4-2); HS.ESS2.D (MS-PS4-2) 
Common Core State Standards Connections:  
ELA/Literacy –  
RST.6-8.1  Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of science and technical texts. (MS-PS4-3) 
RST.6-8.2  Determine the central ideas or conclusions of a text; provide an accurate summary of the text distinct from prior knowledge o r opinions. (MS-PS4-3) 
RST.6-8.9 Compare and contrast the information gained from experiments, simulations, video, or multimedia sources with that gained from reading a text on the same 
topic. (MS-PS4-3) 
WHST.6-8.9  Draw evidence from informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research. (MS -PS4-3) 
SL.8.5  Integrate multimedia and visual displays into presentations to clarify information, strengthen claims and evidence, and add interest.  (MS-PS4-1),(MS-PS4-2) 
Mathematics –  
MP.2 Reason abstractly and quantitatively. (MS-PS4-1) 
MP.4 Model with mathematics. (MS-PS4-1) 
6.RP.A.1 Understand the concept of a ratio and use ratio language to describe a ratio relationship between two quantities. (MS -PS4-1) 
6.RP.A.3 Use ratio and rate reasoning to solve real-world and mathematical problems. (MS-PS4-1) 
7.RP.A.2 Recognize and represent proportional relationships between quantities. (MS -PS4-1) 
8.F.A.3 Interpret the equation y = mx + b as defining a linear function, whose graph is a straight line; give examples of functions t hat are not linear. (MS-PS4-1) 
 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
55 of 103

PDF PAGE 56
 
Middle School Life Science 
 
Students in middle school develop understanding of key concepts to help them make sense of 
life science. The ideas build upon students’ science understanding from earlier grades and from 
the disciplinary core ideas, science and engineering practices, and crosscutting concepts of 
other experiences with physical and earth sciences. There are four life science disciplinary core 
ideas in middle school: 1) From Molecules to Organisms: Structures and Processes, 2) 
Ecosystems: Interactions, Energy, and Dynamics, 3) Heredity: Inheritance and Variation of 
Traits, 4) Biological Evolution: Unity and Diversity. The performance expectations in middle 
school blend the core ideas with scientific and engineering practices and crosscutting concepts 
to support students in developing useable knowledge across the science disciplines. While the 
performance expectations in middle school life science couple particular practices with specific 
disciplinary core ideas, instructional decisions should include use of many science and 
engineering practices integrated in the performance expectations. 
 
The performance expectations in LS1: From Molecules to Organisms: Structures and 
Processes help students formulate an answer to the question, “How can one explain the ways 
cells contribute to the function of living organisms.” The LS1 Disciplinary Core Idea from the 
NRC Framework is organized into four sub-ideas:  Structure and Function, Growth and 
Development of Organisms, Organization for Matter and Energy Flow in Organisms, and 
Information Processing. Students can gather information and use this information to support 
explanations of the structure and function relationship of cells. They can communicate 
understanding of cell theory. They have a basic understanding of the role of cells in body 
systems and how those systems work to support the life functions of the organism. The 
understanding of cells provides a context for the plant process of photosynthesis and the 
movement of matter and energy needed for the cell. Students can construct an explanation for 
how environmental and genetic factors affect growth of organisms.  They can connect this to 
the role of animal behaviors in reproduction of animals as well as the dependence of some 
plants on animal behaviors for their reproduction. Crosscutting concepts of cause and effect, 
structure and function, and matter and energy are called out as organizing concepts for the 
core ideas about processes of living organisms.  
 
The performance expectations in LS2: Interactions, Energy, and Dynamics Relationships 
in Ecosystems help students formulate an answer to the question, “How does a system of 
living and non-living things operate to meet the needs of the organisms in an ecosystem?” The 
LS2 Disciplinary Core Idea is divided into three sub-ideas:  Interdependent Relationships in 
Ecosystems; Cycles of Matter and Energy Transfer in Ecosystems; and Ecosystem Dynamics, 
Functioning, and Resilience. Students can analyze and interpret data, develop models, and 
construct arguments and demonstrate a deeper understanding of resources and the cycling of 
matter and the flow of energy in ecosystems. They can also study patterns of the interactions 
among organisms within an ecosystem. They consider biotic and abiotic factors in an ecosystem 
and the effects these factors have on population. They evaluate competing design solutions for 
maintaining biodiversity and ecosystem services.   
 
The performance expectations in LS3: Heredity: Inheritance and Variation of Traits help 
students formulate an answer to the question, “How do living organisms pass traits from one 
generation to the next?” The LS3 Disciplinary Core Idea from the NRC Framework includes two 
sub-ideas:  Inheritance of Traits, and Variation of Traits. Students can use models to describe 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
56 of 103

PDF PAGE 57
 
ways gene mutations and sexual reproduction contribute to genetic variation. Crosscutting 
concepts of cause and effect and structure and function provide students with a deeper 
understanding of how gene structure determines differences in the functioning of organisms. 
 
The performance expectations in LS4: Biological Evolution: Unity and Diversity help 
students formulate an answer to the question, “How do organisms change over time in 
response to changes in the environment?” The LS4 Disciplinary Core Idea is divided into four 
sub-ideas:  Evidence of Common Ancestry and Diversity, Natural Selection, Adaptation, and 
Biodiversity and Humans. Students can construct explanations based on evidence to support 
fundamental understandings of natural selection and evolution. They can use ideas of genetic 
variation in a population to make sense of organisms surviving and reproducing, hence passing 
on the traits of the species. They are able to use fossil records and anatomical similarities of the 
relationships among organisms and species to support their understanding. Crosscutting 
concepts of patterns and structure and function contribute to the evidence students can use to 
describe biological evolution.     
 
 
 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
57 of 103

PDF PAGE 58
MS-LS1    From Molecules to Organisms: Structures and Processes 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practi ce or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated   
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
MS-LS1    From Molecules to Organisms: Structures and Processes 
Students who demonstrate understanding can: 
MS-LS1-1. Conduct an investigation to provide evidence that living things are made of cells; either one cell or many 
different numbers and types of cells.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on developing evidence that living things are made of cells, 
distinguishing between living and non-living things, and understanding that living things may be made of one cell or many and varied cells.] 
MS-LS1-2. Develop and use a model to describe the function of a cell as a whole and ways the parts of cells contribute to 
the function.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on the cell functioning as a whole system and the primary role of identified parts of the cell, specifically 
the nucleus, chloroplasts, mitochondria, cell membrane, and cell wall.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment of organelle structure/function relationships is limited to 
the cell wall and cell membrane. Assessment of the function of the other organelles is limited to their relationship to the whole cell. Assessment does not include the 
biochemical function of cells or cell parts.] 
MS-LS1-3. Use argument supported by evidence for how the body is a system of interacting subsystems composed of 
groups of cells.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on the conceptual understanding that cells form tissues and tissues form organs specialized for 
particular body functions. Examples could include the interaction of subsystems within a system and the normal functioning of those systems.] [Assessment 
Boundary:  Assessment does not include the mechanism of one body system independent of others. Assessment is limited to the circulatory, excretory, digestive, 
respiratory, muscular, and nervous systems.] 
MS-LS1-4. Use argument based on empirical evidence and scientific reasoning to support an explanation for how 
characteristic animal behaviors and specialized plant structures affect the probability of successful reproduction 
of animals and plants respectively.  [Clarification Statement:  Examples of behaviors that affect the probability of animal reproduction could include  
nest building to protect young from cold, herding of animals to protect young from predators, and vocalization of animals and colorful plumage to attract mates for 
breeding. Examples of animal behaviors that affect the probability of plant reproduction could include transferring pollen or seeds, and creating conditions for seed 
germination and growth. Examples of plant structures could include bright flowers attracting butterflies that transfer pollen, flower nectar and odors that attract 
insects that transfer pollen, and hard shells on nuts that squirrels bury.]   
MS-LS1-5. Construct a scientific explanation based on evidence for how environmental and genetic factors influence the 
growth of organisms.  [Clarification Statement:  Examples of local environmental conditions could include availability of food, light, space, and water.  
Examples of genetic factors could include large breed cattle and species of grass affecting growth of organisms. Examples of evidence could include drought 
decreasing plant growth, fertilizer increasing plant growth, different varieties of plant seeds growing at different rates in different conditions, and fish growing larger 
in large ponds than they do in small ponds.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include genetic mechanisms, gene regulation, or biochemical processes.] 
MS-LS1-6. Construct a scientific explanation based on evidence for the role of photosynthesis in the cycling of matter and 
flow of energy into and out of organisms.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on tracing movement of matter and flow of energy.] 
[Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include the biochemical mechanisms of photosynthesis.] 
MS-LS1-7. Develop a model to describe how food is rearranged through chemical reactions forming new molecules that 
support growth and/or release energy as this matter moves through an organism.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on 
describing that molecules are broken apart and put back together and that in this process, energy is released.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include 
details of the chemical reactions for photosynthesis or respiration.]   
MS-LS1-8. Gather and synthesize information that sensory receptors respond to stimuli by sending messages to the brain 
for immediate behavior or storage as memories.  [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include mechanisms for the transmission of 
this information.] 
The performance expectations above were developed using the following elements from the NRC document  A Framework for K-12 Science Education: 
 
Science and Engineering Practices 
Developing and Using Models 
Modeling in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences and progresses 
to developing, using, and revising models to describe, test, 
and predict more abstract phenomena and design 
systems. 
▪ Develop and use a model to describe phenomena. 
(MS-LS1-2) 
▪ Develop a model to describe unobservable 
mechanisms. (MS-LS1-7) 
Planning and Carrying Out Investigations 
Planning and carrying out investigations in 6-8 builds on K-
5 experiences and progresses to include investigations that 
use multiple variables and provide evidence to support 
explanations or solutions. 
▪ Conduct an investigation to produce data to serve as 
the basis for evidence that meet the goals of an 
investigation. (MS-LS1-1) 
Constructing Explanations and Designing Solutions  
Constructing explanations and designing solutions in 6–8 
builds on K–5 experiences and progresses to include 
constructing explanations and designing solutions 
supported by multiple sources of evidence consistent with 
scientific knowledge, principles, and theories. 
▪ Construct a scientific explanation based on valid and 
reliable evidence obtained from sources (including the 
students’ own experiments) and the assumption that 
theories and laws that describe the natural world 
operate today as they did in the past and will continue 
to do so in the future. (MS-LS1-5),(MS-LS1-6) 
Engaging in Argument from Evidence 
Engaging in argument from evidence in 6–8 builds on K–5 
experiences and progresses to constructing a convincing 
 
Disciplinary Core Ideas 
LS1.A:  Structure and Function 
▪ All living things are made up of cells, which is the 
smallest unit that can be said to be alive. An organism 
may consist of one single cell (unicellular) or many 
different numbers and types of cells (multicellular). 
(MS-LS1-1) 
▪ Within cells, special structures are responsible for 
particular functions, and the cell membrane forms the 
boundary that controls what enters and leaves the cell. 
(MS-LS1-2) 
▪ In multicellular organisms, the body is a system of 
multiple interacting subsystems. These subsystems are 
groups of cells that work together to form tissues and 
organs that are specialized for particular body functions. 
(MS-LS1-3) 
LS1.B:  Growth and Development of Organisms  
▪ Animals engage in characteristic behaviors that increase 
the odds of reproduction. (MS-LS1-4) 
▪ Plants reproduce in a variety of ways, sometimes 
depending on animal behavior and specialized features 
for reproduction. (MS-LS1-4) 
▪ Genetic factors as well as local conditions affect the 
growth of the adult plant. (MS-LS1-5) 
LS1.C:  Organization for Matter and Energy Flow in 
Organisms 
▪ Plants, algae (including phytoplankton), and many 
microorganisms use the energy from light to make 
sugars (food) from carbon dioxide from the atmosphere 
and water through the process of photosynthesis, which 
also releases oxygen. These sugars can be used 
immediately or stored for growth or later use. (MS-LS1-
6) 
 
Crosscutting Concepts 
Cause and Effect 
▪ Cause and effect relationships may be used to 
predict phenomena in natural systems. (MS-LS1-8) 
▪ Phenomena may have more than one cause, and 
some cause and effect relationships in systems can 
only be described using probability. (MS-LS1-4),(MS-
LS1-5) 
Scale, Proportion, and Quantity 
▪ Phenomena that can be observed at one scale may 
not be observable at another scale. (MS-LS1-1) 
Systems and System Models  
▪ Systems may interact with other systems; they may 
have sub-systems and be a part of larger complex 
systems. (MS-LS1-3) 
Energy and Matter  
▪ Matter is conserved because atoms are conserved in 
physical and chemical processes. (MS-LS1-7) 
▪ Within a natural system, the transfer of energy 
drives the motion and/or cycling of matter. (MS-LS1-
6) 
Structure and Function  
▪ Complex and microscopic structures and systems can 
be visualized, modeled, and used to describe how 
their function depends on the relationships among its 
parts, therefore complex natural structures/systems 
can be analyzed to determine how they function. 
(MS-LS1-2) 
 
------------------------------------------------------ 
Connections to Engineering, Technology, 
and Applications of Science 
 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
58 of 103

PDF PAGE 59
MS-LS1    From Molecules to Organisms: Structures and Processes 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practi ce or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated   
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
 
argument that supports or refutes claims for either 
explanations or solutions about the natural and designed 
world(s).  
▪ Use an oral and written argument supported by 
evidence to support or refute an explanation or a 
model for a phenomenon.  (MS-LS1-3) 
▪ Use an oral and written argument supported by 
empirical evidence and scientific reasoning to support 
or refute an explanation or a model for a phenomenon 
or a solution to a problem.  (MS-LS1-4) 
Obtaining, Evaluating, and Communicating 
Information 
Obtaining, evaluating, and communicating information in 
6-8 builds on K-5 experiences and progresses to 
evaluating the merit and validity of ideas and methods. 
▪ Gather, read, and synthesize information from multiple 
appropriate sources and assess the credibility, 
accuracy, and possible bias of each publication and 
methods used, and describe how they are supported 
or not supported by evidence. (MS-LS1-8) 
 
----------------------------------------------------  
Connections to Nature of Science  
 
Scientific Knowledge is Based on Empirical 
Evidence 
▪ Science knowledge is based upon logical connections 
between evidence and explanations. (MS-LS1-6) 
▪ Within individual organisms, food moves through a 
series of chemical reactions in which it is broken down 
and rearranged to form new molecules, to support 
growth, or to release energy. (MS-LS1-7)  
LS1.D:  Information Processing 
▪ Each sense receptor responds to different inputs 
(electromagnetic, mechanical, chemical), transmitting 
them as signals that travel along nerve cells to the 
brain. The signals are then processed in the brain, 
resulting in immediate behaviors or memories. (MS-LS1-
8) 
PS3.D:  Energy in Chemical Processes and Everyday 
Life 
▪ The chemical reaction by which plants produce complex 
food molecules (sugars) requires an energy input (i.e., 
from sunlight) to occur. In this reaction, carbon dioxide 
and water combine to form carbon-based organic 
molecules and release oxygen. (secondary to MS-LS1-6) 
▪ Cellular respiration in plants and animals involve 
chemical reactions with oxygen that release stored 
energy. In these processes, complex molecules 
containing carbon react with oxygen to produce carbon 
dioxide and other materials. (secondary to MS-LS1-7) 
Interdependence of Science, Engineering, and 
Technology 
▪ Engineering advances have led to important 
discoveries in virtually every field of science, and 
scientific discoveries have led to the development of 
entire industries and engineered systems. (MS-LS1-
1) 
 
------------------------------------------------------ 
Connections to Nature of Science  
 
Science is a Human Endeavor 
▪ Scientists and engineers are guided by habits of mind 
such as intellectual honesty, tolerance of ambiguity, 
skepticism, and openness to new ideas. (MS-LS1-3) 
Connections to other DCIs in this grade-band:  MS.PS1.B (MS-LS1-6),(MS-LS1-7); MS.LS2.A (MS-LS1-4),(MS-LS1-5); MS.LS3.A (MS-LS1-2); MS.ESS2.A (MS-LS1-6) 
Articulation to DCIs across grade-bands: 3.LS1.B (MS-LS1-4),(MS-LS1-5); 3.LS3.A (MS-LS1-5); 4.LS1.A (MS-LS1-2); 4.LS1.D (MS-LS1-8); 5.PS3.D (MS-LS1-6),(MS-LS1-7); 5.LS1.C 
(MS-LS1-6),(MS-LS1-7); 5.LS2.A (MS-LS1-6); 5.LS2.B (MS-LS1-6),(MS-LS1-7); HS.PS1.B (MS-LS1-6),(MS-LS1-7); HS.LS1.A (MS-LS1-1),(MS-LS1-2),(MS-LS1-3),(MS-LS1-8); 
HS.LS1.C (MS-LS1-6),(MS-LS1-7); HS.LS2.A (MS-LS1-4),(MS-LS1-5); HS.LS2.B (MS-LS1-6),(MS-LS1-7); HS.LS2.D (MS-LS1-4);  HS.ESS2.D (MS-LS1-6) 
Common Core State Standards Connections:  
ELA/Literacy –  
RST.6-8.1  Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of science and technical texts.  (MS-LS1-3),(MS-LS1-4),(MS-LS1-5),(MS-LS1-6) 
RST.6-8.2  Determine the central ideas or conclusions of a text; provide an accurate summary of the text distinct from prior knowledge o r opinions. (MS-LS1-5),(MS-LS1-6) 
RI.6.8   Trace and evaluate the argument and specific claims in a text, distinguishing claims that are supported by reasons and eviden ce from claims that are not.  (MS-
LS1-3),(MS-LS1-4) 
WHST.6-8.1   Write arguments focused on discipline content. (MS-LS1-3),(MS-LS1-4) 
WHST.6-8.2   Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas, concepts, and information through the selection, org anization, and analysis of relevant 
content. (MS-LS1-5),(MS-LS1-6) 
WHST.6-8.7  Conduct short research projects to answer a question (including a self-generated question), drawing on several sources and generating additional related, 
focused questions that allow for multiple avenues of exploration. (MS-LS1-1) 
WHST.6-8.8  Gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources, using search terms effectively; assess the credibility and accuracy of each source; and quot e 
or paraphrase the data and conclusions of others while avoiding plagiarism and following a standard format for citation.  (MS-LS1-8) 
WHST.6-8.9  Draw evidence from informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research. (MS-LS1-5),(MS-LS1-6) 
SL.8.5  Integrate multimedia and visual displays into presentations to clarify information, strengthen claims and evidence, and add interest. (MS-LS1-2),(MS-LS1-7) 
Mathematics –  
6.EE.C.9  Use variables to represent two quantities in a real-world problem that change in relationship to one another; write an equation to express one quantity, thought 
of as the dependent variable, in terms of the other quantity, thought of as the independent variable. Analyze the relationship between the dependent and 
independent variables using graphs and tables, and relate these to the equation.  (MS-LS1-1),(MS-LS1-2),(MS-LS1-3),(MS-LS1-6) 
6.SP.A.2 Understand that a set of data collected to answer a statistical question has a distribution which can be described by its cen ter, spread, and overall shape. (MS-
LS1-4),(MS-LS1-5) 
6.SP.B.4 Summarize numerical data sets in relation to their context. (MS-LS1-4),(MS-LS1-5) 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
59 of 103

PDF PAGE 60
MS-LS2  Ecosystems:  Interactions, Energy, and Dynamics 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practi ce or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated   
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
MS-LS2     Ecosystems:  Interactions, Energy, and Dynamics 
Students who demonstrate understanding can: 
MS-LS2-1. Analyze and interpret data to provide evidence for the effects of resource availability on organisms and 
populations of organisms in an ecosystem.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on cause and effect relationships between resources and 
growth of individual organisms and the numbers of organisms in ecosystems during periods of abundant and scarce resources.]  
MS-LS2-2. Construct an explanation that predicts patterns of interactions among organisms across multiple ecosystems.  
[Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on predicting consistent patterns of interactions in different ecosystems in terms of the relationship s among and between 
organisms and abiotic components of ecosystems. Examples of types of interactions could include competitive, predatory, and mutually beneficial.]   
MS-LS2-3. Develop a model to describe the cycling of matter and flow of energy among living and nonliving parts of an 
ecosystem.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on describing the conservation of matter and flow of energy into and out of various ecosystems, and on 
defining the boundaries of the system.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include the use of chemical reactions to describe the processes.] 
MS-LS2-4. Construct an argument supported by empirical evidence that changes to physical or biological components of an 
ecosystem affect populations.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on recognizing patterns in data and making warranted inferences about changes 
in populations, and on evaluating empirical evidence supporting arguments about changes to ecosystems.] 
MS-LS2-5. Evaluate competing design solutions for maintaining biodiversity and ecosystem services.*  [Clarification Statement:  
Examples of ecosystem services could include water purification, nutrient recycling, and prevention of soil erosion. Examples of design solution constraints could 
include scientific, economic, and social considerations.] 
The performance expectations above were developed using the following elements from the NRC document A Framework for K-12 Science Education: 
 
Science and Engineering Practices 
Developing and Using Models 
Modeling in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences and 
progresses to developing, using, and revising models to 
describe, test, and predict more abstract phenomena and 
design systems. 
▪ Develop a model to describe phenomena. (MS-LS2-3) 
Analyzing and Interpreting Data 
Analyzing data in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences and 
progresses to extending quantitative analysis to 
investigations, distinguishing between correlation and 
causation, and basic statistical techniques of data and 
error analysis.  
▪ Analyze and interpret data to provide evidence for 
phenomena. (MS-LS2-1) 
Constructing Explanations and Designing 
Solutions 
Constructing explanations and designing solutions in 6–8 
builds on K–5 experiences and progresses to include 
constructing explanations and designing solutions 
supported by multiple sources of evidence consistent 
with scientific ideas, principles, and theories. 
▪ Construct an explanation that includes qualitative or 
quantitative relationships between variables that 
predict phenomena. (MS-LS2-2) 
Engaging in Argument from Evidence 
Engaging in argument from evidence in 6–8 builds on K–
5 experiences and progresses to constructing a 
convincing argument that supports or refutes claims for 
either explanations or solutions about the natural and 
designed world(s). 
▪ Construct an oral and written argument supported by 
empirical evidence and scientific reasoning to support 
or refute an explanation or a model for a 
phenomenon or a solution to a problem. (MS-LS2-4) 
▪ Evaluate competing design solutions based on jointly 
developed and agreed-upon design criteria. (MS-LS2-
5) 
 
---------------------------------------------- 
Connections to Nature of Science 
 
Scientific Knowledge is Based on Empirical 
Evidence 
▪ Science disciplines share common rules of obtaining 
and evaluating empirical evidence. (MS-LS2-4) 
 
 
Disciplinary Core Ideas 
LS2.A:  Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems 
▪ Organisms, and populations of organisms, are dependent on 
their environmental interactions both with other living things and 
with nonliving factors. (MS-LS2-1) 
▪ In any ecosystem, organisms and populations with similar 
requirements for food, water, oxygen, or other resources may 
compete with each other for limited resources, access to which 
consequently constrains their growth and reproduction. (MS-LS2-
1) 
▪ Growth of organisms and population increases are limited by 
access to resources. (MS-LS2-1) 
▪ Similarly, predatory interactions may reduce the number of 
organisms or eliminate whole populations of organisms. Mutually 
beneficial interactions, in contrast, may become so 
interdependent that each organism requires the other for 
survival. Although the species involved in these competitive, 
predatory, and mutually beneficial interactions vary across 
ecosystems, the patterns of interactions of organisms with their 
environments, both living and nonliving, are shared. (MS-LS2-2) 
LS2.B:  Cycle of Matter and Energy Transfer in Ecosystems  
▪ Food webs are models that demonstrate how matter and energy 
is transferred between producers, consumers, and decomposers 
as the three groups interact within an ecosystem. Transfers of 
matter into and out of the physical environment occur at every 
level. Decomposers recycle nutrients from dead plant or animal 
matter back to the soil in terrestrial environments or to the 
water in aquatic environments. The atoms that make up the 
organisms in an ecosystem are cycled repeatedly between the 
living and nonliving parts of the ecosystem. (MS-LS2-3) 
LS2.C:  Ecosystem Dynamics, Functioning, and Resilience  
▪ Ecosystems are dynamic in nature; their characteristics can vary 
over time. Disruptions to any physical or biological component of 
an ecosystem can lead to shifts in all its populations. (MS-LS2-4) 
▪ Biodiversity describes the variety of species found in Earth’s 
terrestrial and oceanic ecosystems. The completeness or 
integrity of an ecosystem’s biodiversity is often used as a 
measure of its health. (MS-LS2-5) 
LS4.D:  Biodiversity and Humans  
▪ Changes in biodiversity can influence humans’ resources, such as 
food, energy, and medicines, as well as ecosystem services that 
humans rely on—for example, water purification and recycling. 
(secondary to MS-LS2-5) 
ETS1.B: Developing Possible Solutions 
▪ There are systematic processes for evaluating solutions with 
respect to how well they meet the criteria and constraints of a 
problem. (secondary to MS-LS2-5)  
  
 
Crosscutting Concepts 
Patterns 
▪ Patterns can be used to identify cause and 
effect relationships. (MS-LS2-2) 
Cause and Effect 
▪ Cause and effect relationships may be used to 
predict phenomena in natural or designed 
systems. (MS-LS2-1) 
Energy and Matter  
▪ The transfer of energy can be tracked as 
energy flows through a natural system. (MS-
LS2-3) 
Stability and Change 
▪ Small changes in one part of a system might 
cause large changes in another part. (MS-
LS2-4),(MS-LS2-5)  
 
-------------------------------------------------- 
Connections to Engineering, Technology, 
and Applications of Science 
 
Influence of Science, Engineering, and 
Technology on Society and the Natural 
World 
▪ The use of technologies and any limitations 
on their use are driven by individual or 
societal needs, desires, and values; by the 
findings of scientific research; and by 
differences in such factors as climate, natural 
resources, and economic conditions. Thus 
technology use varies from region to region 
and over time. (MS-LS2-5) 
 
------------------------------------------------
Connections to Nature of Science  
 
Scientific Knowledge Assumes an Order and 
Consistency in Natural Systems 
▪ Science assumes that objects and events in 
natural systems occur in consistent patterns 
that are understandable through 
measurement and observation. (MS-LS2-3) 
Science Addresses Questions About the 
Natural and Material World 
▪ Scientific knowledge can describe the 
consequences of actions but does not 
necessarily prescribe the decisions that 
society takes. (MS-LS2-5) 
 
 
 
Connections to other DCIs in this grade-band:  MS.PS1.B (MS-LS2-3); MS.LS1.B (MS-LS2-2); MS.LS4.C (MS-LS2-4); MS.LS4.D (MS-LS2-4); MS.ESS2.A (MS-LS2-3),(MS-LS2-4); 
MS.ESS3.A (MS-LS2-1),(MS-LS2-4); MS.ESS3.C (MS-LS2-1),(MS-LS2-4),(MS-LS2-5) 
Articulation across grade-bands:  1.LS1.B (MS-LS2-2); 3.LS2.C (MS-LS2-1),(MS-LS2-4); 3.LS4.D (MS-LS2-1),(MS-LS2-4); 5.LS2.A (MS-LS2-1),(MS-LS2-3); 5.LS2.B (MS-LS2-3); 
HS.PS3.B (MS-LS2-3); HS.LS1.C (MS-LS2-3); HS.LS2.A (MS-LS2-1),(MS-LS2-2),(MS-LS2-5); HS.LS2.B (MS-LS2-2),(MS-LS2-3); HS.LS2.C (MS-LS2-4),(MS-LS2-5); HS.LS2.D (MS-
LS2-2); HS.LS4.C (MS-LS2-1),(MS-LS2-4); HS.LS4.D (MS-LS2-1),(MS-LS2-4),(MS-LS2-5); HS.ESS2.A (MS-LS2-3); HS.ESS2.E (MS-LS2-4); HS.ESS3.A (MS-LS2-1),(MS-LS2-5); 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
60 of 103

PDF PAGE 61
MS-LS2  Ecosystems:  Interactions, Energy, and Dynamics 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practi ce or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated   
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
HS.ESS3.B (MS-LS2-4); HS.ESS3.C (MS-LS2-4),(MS-LS2-5); HS.ESS3.D (MS-LS2-5) 
Common Core State Standards Connections:  
ELA/Literacy –  
RST.6-8.1   Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of science and technical texts. (MS -LS2-1),(MS-LS2-2),(MS-LS2-4) 
RST.6-8.7   Integrate quantitative or technical information expressed in words in a text with a version of that information expressed vis ually (e.g., in a flowchart, diagram, 
model, graph, or table). (MS-LS2-1) 
RST.6-8.8   Distinguish among facts, reasoned judgment based on research findings, and speculation in a text. (MS -LS2-5) 
RI.8.8   Trace and evaluate the argument and specific claims in a text, assessing whether the reasoning is sound and the evidence is relevant and sufficient to support 
the claims. (MS-LS2-4),(MS-LS2-5) 
WHST.6-8.1 Write arguments to support claims with clear reasons and relevant evidence. (MS -LS2-4) 
WHST.6-8.2 Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas, concepts, and information through the selection, org anization, and analysis of relevant 
content. (MS-LS2-2) 
WHST.6-8.9 Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support an alysis, reflection, and research. (MS-LS2-2),(MS-LS2-4) 
SL.8.1 Engage effectively in a range of collaborative discussions (one-on-one, in groups, and teacher-led) with diverse partners on grade 8 topics, texts, and issues, 
building on others’ ideas and expressing their own clearly. (MS-LS2-2) 
SL.8.4 Present claims and findings, emphasizing salient points in a focused, coherent manner with relevant evidence, sound valid reasoning, and well -chosen details; 
use appropriate eye contact, adequate volume, and clear pronunciation. (MS-LS2-2) 
SL.8.5 Integrate multimedia and visual displays into presentations to clarify information, strengthen claims and evidence, and add i nterest. (MS-LS2-3) 
Mathematics –  
MP.4 Model with mathematics. (MS-LS2-5) 
6.RP.A.3 Use ratio and rate reasoning to solve real-world and mathematical problems. (MS-LS2-5) 
6.EE.C.9 Use variables to represent two quantities in a real-world problem that change in relationship to one another; write an equation to express one quantity, thought  
of as the dependent variable, in terms of the other quantity, thought of as the independent variable. Analyze the relationshi p between the dependent and 
independent variables using graphs and tables, and relate these to the equation.  (MS-LS2-3) 
6.SP.B.5 Summarize numerical data sets in relation to their context. (MS-LS2-2) 
 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
61 of 103

PDF PAGE 62
MS-LS3  Heredity:  Inheritance and Variation of Traits 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practice or Disciplinary  C ore Idea.  
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting C oncepts, and C ore Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National A cademy  of Sciences.  
MS-LS3     Heredity:  Inheritance and Variation of Traits  
Students who demonstrate understanding can:  
MS-LS3-1. Develop and use a model to describe why structural changes to genes  (mutations)  located on chromosomes  may 
affect proteins and may result in harmful, beneficial, or neutral effects to the structure and function of the 
organism.  [C larification Statement:  Emphasis is on conceptual understanding that changes in genetic material may result in making different proteins.] 
[A ssessment Boundary:  A ssessment does not include specific changes at the molecular level, mechanisms for protein synthesis, or specific ty pes of mutations.] 
MS-LS3-2. Develop and use a model to  describe why asexual reproduction results in offspring with identical genetic 
information and sexual reproduction results in offspring with genetic variation .  [C larification Statement:  Emphasis is on using 
models such as Punnett squares, diagrams, and simulations to describe the cause and effect relationship of gene transmission from parent(s) to offspring and 
resulting genetic v ariation.] 
The performance expectations abov e were dev eloped using the following elements from the NRC  document  A  Framework for K -12 Science Educati on: 
 
Science and Engineering Practices  
Developing and Using Models 
Modeling in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences and 
progresses to dev eloping, using, and revising models 
to describe, test, and predict more abstract 
phenomena and design systems.  
 Dev elop and use a model to describe phenomena. 
(MS -LS3-1),(MS-LS3-2) 
 
 
 
Disciplinary Core Ideas  
LS1 .B:  Growth and Development of Organisms  
 O rganisms reproduce, either sexually or asexually, and transfer 
their genetic information to their offspring. (secondary to MS-
LS3-2) 
LS3 .A:  Inheritance of Traits 
 Genes are located in the chromosomes of cells, with each 
chromosome pair containing two variants of each of many 
distinct genes. Each distinct gene chiefly controls the production 
of specific proteins, which in turn affects the traits of the 
indiv idual. Changes (mutations) to genes can result in changes 
to proteins, which can affect the structures and functions of the 
organism and thereby  change traits. (MS-LS3-1) 
 V ariations of inherited traits between parent and offspring arise 
from genetic differences that result from the subset of 
chromosomes (and therefore genes) inherited. (MS-LS3-2) 
LS3 .B:  Variation of Traits  
 In sexually  reproducing organisms, each parent contributes half 
of the genes acquired (at random) by  the offspring. Individuals 
hav e two of each chromosome and hence two alleles of each 
gene, one acquired from each parent. These versions may be 
identical or may  differ from each other. (MS-LS3-2) 
 In addition to v ariations that arise from sexual reproduction, 
genetic information can be altered because of mutations. 
Though rare, mutations may result in changes to the structure 
and function of proteins. Some changes are beneficial, others 
harmful, and some neutral to the organism. (MS-LS3-1) 
 
Crosscutting Concepts  
Cause and Effect 
 C ause and effect relationships may be used to 
predict phenomena in natural sy stems. (MS-LS3-
2) 
Structure and Function 
 C omplex and microscopic structures and systems 
can be v isualized, modeled, and used to describe 
how their function depends on the shapes, 
composition, and relationships among its parts, 
therefore complex natural structures/sy stems 
can be analy zed to determine how they function. 
(MS -LS3-1) 
 
 
C onnections to other DCIs in this grade-band:  MS.LS1.A (MS-LS3-1); MS.LS4.A (MS-LS3-1) 
A rticulation across grade-bands:  3 .LS3.A (MS-LS3-1),(MS-LS3-2); 3 .LS3.B (MS-LS3-1),(MS-LS3-2); HS.LS1.A (MS-LS3-1); HS.LS1.B (MS-LS3-1),(MS-LS3-2); HS.LS3.A (MS-LS3-
1),(MS -LS3-2); HS.LS3-B (MS-LS3-1),(MS-LS3-2) 
C ommon Core State Standards Connections: 
ELA /Literacy –  
RST .6-8.1   C ite specific textual evidence to support analysis of science and technical texts.  (MS-LS3-1),(MS-LS3-2) 
RST .6-8.4   Determine the meaning of symbols, key terms, and other domain-specific words and phrases as they are used in a specific scientific or technical context relevant 
to grades 6-8 texts and topics. (MS -LS3-1),(MS-LS3-2) 
RST .6-8.7 Integrate quantitative or technical information expressed in words in a text with a v ersion of that information expressed visually (e.g., in a flowchart, diagram, 
model, graph, or table). (MS -LS3-1),(MS-LS3-2) 
SL.8 .5 Integrate multimedia and visual displays into presentations to clarify information, strengthen claims and evidence, and add interest. (MS-LS3-1),(MS-LS3-2) 
Mathematics –  
MP.4  Model with mathematics. (MS-LS3-2) 
6 .SP.B.5 Summarize numerical data sets in relation to their context. (MS-LS3-2) 
 
April 2014
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
1 of 1
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
62 of 103

PDF PAGE 63
MS-LS4  Biological Evolution: Unity and Diversity 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practice or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences.  
 
 
MS-LS4     Biological Evolution:  Unity and Diversity 
Students who demonstrate understanding can: 
MS-LS4-1. Analyze and interpret data for patterns in the fossil record that document the existence, diversity, extinction, 
and change of life forms throughout the history of life on Earth under the assumption that natural laws operate 
today as in the past.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on finding patterns of changes in the level of complexity of anatomical structures in organisms 
and the chronological order of fossil appearance in the rock layers.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include the names of individual species or 
geological eras in the fossil record.] 
MS-LS4-2. Apply scientific ideas to construct an explanation for the anatomical similarities and differences among modern 
organisms and between modern and fossil organisms to infer evolutionary relationships.  [Clarification Statement:  
Emphasis is on explanations of the evolutionary relationships among organisms in terms of similarity or differences of the gross appear ance of anatomical 
structures.] 
MS-LS4-3. Analyze displays of pictorial data to compare patterns of similarities in the embryological development across 
multiple species to identify relationships not evident in the fully formed anatomy.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on 
inferring general patterns of relatedness among embryos of different organisms by comparing the macroscopic appearance of diagrams or pictures.] [Assessment 
Boundary:  Assessment of comparisons is limited to gross appearance of anatomical structures in embryological development .] 
MS-LS4-4. Construct an explanation based on evidence that describes how genetic variations of traits in a population 
increase some individuals’ probability of surviving and reproducing in a specific environment.  [Clarification Statement:  
Emphasis is on using simple probability statements and proportional reasoning to construct explanations.]  
MS-LS4-5. Gather and synthesize information about technologies that have changed the way humans influence the 
inheritance of desired traits in organisms.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on synthesizing information from reliable sources about the 
influence of humans on genetic outcomes in artificial selection (such as genetic modification, animal husbandry, gene therapy); and, on the impacts these 
technologies have on society as well as the technologies leading to these scientific discoveries.]  
MS-LS4-6. Use mathematical representations to support explanations of how natural selection may lead to increases and 
decreases of specific traits in populations over time.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on using mathematical models, probability 
statements, and proportional reasoning to support explanations of trends in changes to populations over time.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not 
include Hardy Weinberg calculations.] 
The performance expectations above were developed using the following elements from the NRC document A Framework for K-12 Science Education: 
 
Science and Engineering Practices 
Analyzing and Interpreting Data 
Analyzing data in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences and 
progresses to extending quantitative analysis to investigations, 
distinguishing between correlation and causation, and basic 
statistical techniques of data and error analysis. 
▪ Analyze displays of data to identify linear and nonlinear 
relationships. (MS-LS4-3) 
▪ Analyze and interpret data to determine similarities and 
differences in findings. (MS-LS4-1) 
Using Mathematics and Computational Thinking 
Mathematical and computational thinking in 6–8 builds on K–5 
experiences and progresses to identifying patterns in large data 
sets and using mathematical concepts to support explanations 
and arguments. 
▪ Use mathematical representations to support scientific 
conclusions and design solutions. (MS-LS4-6) 
Constructing Explanations and Designing Solutions  
Constructing explanations and designing solutions in 6–8 builds 
on K–5 experiences and progresses to include constructing 
explanations and designing solutions supported by multiple 
sources of evidence consistent with scientific ideas, principles, 
and theories. 
▪ Apply scientific ideas to construct an explanation for real-
world phenomena, examples, or events. (MS-LS4-2) 
▪ Construct an explanation that includes qualitative or 
quantitative relationships between variables that describe 
phenomena. (MS-LS4-4) 
Obtaining, Evaluating, and Communicating Information  
Obtaining, evaluating, and communicating information in 6–8 
builds on K–5 experiences and progresses to evaluating the 
merit and validity of ideas and methods. 
▪ Gather, read, and synthesize information from multiple 
appropriate sources and assess the credibility, accuracy, 
and possible bias of each publication and methods used, 
and describe how they are supported or not supported by 
evidence. (MS-LS4-5) 
 
---------------------------------------------- 
Connections to Nature of Science  
 
Scientific Knowledge is Based on Empirical Evidence 
▪ Science knowledge is based upon logical and conceptual 
connections between evidence and explanations. (MS-LS4-
1) 
 
Disciplinary Core Ideas 
LS4.A:  Evidence of Common Ancestry and Diversity  
▪ The collection of fossils and their placement in 
chronological order (e.g., through the location of the 
sedimentary layers in which they are found or through 
radioactive dating) is known as the fossil record. It 
documents the existence, diversity, extinction, and 
change of many life forms throughout the history of life 
on Earth. (MS-LS4-1) 
▪ Anatomical similarities and differences between various 
organisms living today and between them and 
organisms in the fossil record, enable the reconstruction 
of evolutionary history and the inference of lines of 
evolutionary descent. (MS-LS4-2) 
▪ Comparison of the embryological development of 
different species also reveals similarities that show 
relationships not evident in the fully-formed anatomy. 
(MS-LS4-3)  
LS4.B:  Natural Selection 
▪ Natural selection leads to the predominance of certain 
traits in a population, and the suppression of others. 
(MS-LS4-4) 
▪ In artificial selection, humans have the capacity to 
influence certain characteristics of organisms by 
selective breeding. One can choose desired parental 
traits determined by genes, which are then passed on 
to offspring. (MS-LS4-5) 
LS4.C:  Adaptation  
▪ Adaptation by natural selection acting over generations 
is one important process by which species change over 
time in response to changes in environmental 
conditions. Traits that support successful survival and 
reproduction in the new environment become more 
common; those that do not become less common. 
Thus, the distribution of traits in a population changes. 
(MS-LS4-6) 
 
 
Crosscutting Concepts 
Patterns  
▪ Patterns can be used to identify cause and 
effect relationships. (MS-LS4-2) 
▪ Graphs, charts, and images can be used to 
identify patterns in data. (MS-LS4-1),(MS-LS4-
3) 
Cause and Effect 
▪ Phenomena may have more than one cause, 
and some cause and effect relationships in 
systems can only be described using 
probability. (MS-LS4-4),(MS-LS4-5),(MS-LS4-6) 
 
------------------------------------------------- 
Connections to Engineering, Technology, 
and Applications of Science 
 
Interdependence of Science, Engineering, 
and Technology  
▪ Engineering advances have led to important 
discoveries in virtually every field of science, 
and scientific discoveries have led to the 
development of entire industries and 
engineered systems. (MS-LS4-5) 
 
---------------------------------------------- 
Connections to Nature of Science 
 
Scientific Knowledge Assumes an Order and 
Consistency in Natural Systems  
▪ Science assumes that objects and events in 
natural systems occur in consistent patterns 
that are understandable through measurement 
and observation. (MS-LS4-1),(MS-LS4-2) 
Science Addresses Questions About the 
Natural and Material World 
▪ Scientific knowledge can describe the 
consequences of actions but does not 
necessarily prescribe the decisions that society 
takes. (MS-LS4-5) 
 
 
Connections to other DCIs in this grade-band: MS.LS2.A (MS-LS4-4),(MS-LS4-6); MS.LS2.C (MS-LS4-6); MS.LS3.A (MS-LS4-2),(MS-LS4-4); MS.LS3.B (MS-LS4-2),(MS-LS4-4),(MS-
LS4-6); MS.ESS1.C (MS-LS4-1),(MS-LS4-2),(MS-LS4-6); MS.ESS2.B (MS-LS4-1) 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
63 of 103

PDF PAGE 64
MS-LS4  Biological Evolution: Unity and Diversity 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practice or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences.  
 
 
Articulation across grade-bands:  3.LS3.B (MS-LS4-4); 3.LS4.A (MS-LS4-1),(MS-LS4-2); 3. LS4.B (MS-LS4-4); 3.LS4.C (MS-LS4-6); HS.LS2.A (MS-LS4-4),(MS-LS4-6); HS.LS2.C 
(MS-LS4-6); HS.LS3.B (MS-LS4-4),(MS-LS4-5),(MS-LS4-6); HS.LS4.A (MS-LS4-1),(MS-LS4-2),(MS-LS4-3); HS.LS4.B (MS-LS4-4),(MS-LS4-6); HS.LS4.C (MS-LS4-4),(MS-LS4-
5),(MS-LS4-6); HS.ESS1.C (MS-LS4-1),(MS-LS4-2) 
Common Core State Standards Connections:  
ELA/Literacy –  
RST.6-8.1  Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of science and technical texts, attending to the precise details of explan ations or descriptions (MS-LS4-1),(MS-
LS4-2),(MS-LS4-3),(MS-LS4-4),(MS-LS4-5) 
RST.6-8.7  Integrate quantitative or technical information expressed in words in a text with a version of that information expressed vis ually (e.g., in a flowchart, diagram, 
model, graph, or table). (MS-LS4-1),(MS-LS4-3) 
RST.6-8.9 Compare and contrast the information gained from experiments, simulations, video, or multimedia sources with that gained from  reading a text on the same 
topic. (MS-LS4-3),(MS-LS4-4) 
WHST.6-8.2  Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas, concepts, and information through the selection, organizat ion, and analysis of 
relevant content. (MS-LS4-2),(MS-LS4-4) 
WHST.6-8.8   Gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources, using search terms effectively; assess the credibility and accuracy of each source; and 
quote or paraphrase the data and conclusions of others while avoiding plagiarism and following a standard format for citation . (MS-LS4-5) 
WHST.6-8.9  Draw evidence from informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research . (MS-LS4-2),(MS-LS4-4) 
SL.8.1  Engage effectively in a range of collaborative discussions (one-on-one, in groups, teacher-led) with diverse partners on grade 6 topics, texts, and issues, 
building on others’ ideas and expressing their own clearly. (MS-LS4-2),(MS-LS4-4) 
SL.8.4   Present claims and findings, emphasizing salient points in a focused, coherent manner with relevant evidence, sound valid reasoning, and well -chosen details; 
use appropriate eye contact, adequate volume, and clear pronunciation.  (MS-LS4-2),(MS-LS4-4) 
Mathematics –  
MP.4 Model with mathematics. (MS-LS4-6) 
6.RP.A.1 Understand the concept of a ratio and use ratio language to describe a ratio relationship between two quantities.  (MS-LS4-4),(MS-LS4-6) 
6.SP.B.5 Summarize numerical data sets in relation to their context. (MS-LS4-4),(MS-LS4-6) 
6.EE.B.6 Use variables to represent numbers and write expressions when solving a real -world or mathematical problem; understand that a variable can represent an 
unknown number, or, depending on the purpose at hand, any number in a spec ified set. (MS-LS4-1),(MS-LS4-2) 
7.RP.A.2 Recognize and represent proportional relationships between quantities. (MS-LS4-4),(MS-LS4-6) 
 
 
\\ 
 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
64 of 103

PDF PAGE 65
 
 
Middle School Earth and Space Sciences  
 
Students in middle school continue to develop their understanding of the three disciplinary core 
ideas in the Earth and Space Sciences.  The middle school performance expectations in Earth 
Space Science build on the elementary school ideas and skills and allow middle school students 
to explain more in-depth phenomena central not only to the earth and space sciences, but to 
life and physical sciences as well.  These performance expectations blend the core ideas with 
scientific and engineering practices and crosscutting concepts to support students in developing 
useable knowledge to explain ideas across the science disciplines.  While the performance 
expectations shown in middle school earth and space science couple particular practices with 
specific disciplinary core ideas, instructional decisions should include use of many practices that 
lead to the performance expectations. 
 
The performance expectations in ESS1:  Earth’s Place in the Universe, help students 
formulate an answer to questions such as:  “What is Earth’s place in the Universe, What makes 
up our solar system and how can the motion of Earth explain seasons and eclipses, and How do 
people figure out that the Earth and life on Earth have changed through time?”  The ESS1 
Disciplinary Core Idea from the NRC Framework is broken down into three sub-ideas: the 
universe and its stars, Earth and the solar system and the history of planet Earth.  Students 
examine the Earth’s place in relation to the solar system, Milky Way galaxy, and universe. There 
is a strong emphasis on a systems approach, using models of the solar system to explain 
astronomical and other observations of the cyclic patterns of eclipses and seasons. There is also 
a strong connection to engineering through the instruments and technologies that have allowed 
us to explore the objects in our solar system and obtain the data that support the theories that 
explain the formation and evolution of the universe.  Students examine geoscience data in 
order to understand the processes and events in Earth’s history.  The crosscutting concepts of 
patterns, scale, proportion, and quantity, and systems and systems modeling are called out as 
organizing concepts for these disciplinary core ideas.  In the ESS1 performance expectations, 
students are expected to demonstrate proficiency in developing and using models, analyzing 
data, and constructing explanations and designing solutions; and to use these practices to 
demonstrate understanding of the core ideas.   
 
The performance expectations in ESS2:  Earth’s Systems, help students formulate an answer 
to questions such as:  “How do the materials in and on Earth’s crust change over time, How 
does the movement of tectonic plates impact the surface of Earth, How does water influence 
weather, circulate in the oceans, and shape Earth’s surface, What factors interact and influence 
weather, and How have living organisms changed the Earth and how have Earth’s changing 
conditions impacted living organisms?”  The ESS2 Disciplinary Core Idea from the NRC 
Framework is broken down into five sub-ideas: Earth materials and systems, plate tectonics and 
large-scale system interactions, the roles of water in Earth’s surface processes, weather and 
climate, and biogeology.  Students understand how Earth’s geosystems operate by modeling 
the flow of energy and cycling of matter within and among different systems. Students 
investigate the controlling properties of important materials and construct explanations based 
on the analysis of real geoscience data. Of special importance in both topics are the ways that 
geoscience processes provide resources needed by society but also cause natural hazards that 
present risks to society; both involve technological challenges, for the identification and 
development of resources. Students develop understanding of the factors that control weather. 
A systems approach is also important here, examining the feedbacks between systems as 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
65 of 103

PDF PAGE 66
 
 
energy from the sun is transferred between systems and circulates though the ocean and 
atmosphere. The crosscutting concepts of patterns, cause and effect, scale proportion and 
quantity, systems and system models, energy and matter, and stability and change are called 
out as organizing concepts for these disciplinary core ideas.  In the ESS2 performance 
expectations, students are expected to demonstrate proficiency in developing and using models, 
planning and carrying out investigations, analyzing and interpreting data, and constructing 
explanations; and to use these practices to demonstrate understanding of the core ideas.   
 
The performance expectations in ESS3:  Earth and Human Activity help students formulate 
an answer to questions such as:  “How is the availability of needed natural resources related to 
naturally occurring processes, How can natural hazards be predicted, How do human activities 
affect Earth systems, How do we know our global climate is changing?”   The ESS3 Disciplinary 
Core Idea from the NRC Framework is broken down into four sub-ideas: natural resources, 
natural hazards, human impact on Earth systems, and global climate change.  Students 
understand the ways that human activities impacts Earth’s other systems. Students use many 
different practices to understand the significant and complex issues surrounding human uses of 
land, energy, mineral, and water resources and the resulting impacts of their development. The 
crosscutting concepts of patterns, cause and effect, and stability and change are called out as 
organizing concepts for these disciplinary core ideas.  In the ESS3 performance expectations, 
students are expected to demonstrate proficiency in asking questions, developing and using 
models, analyzing and interpreting data, constructing explanations and designing solutions and 
engaging in argument; and to use these practices to demonstrate understanding of the core 
ideas.   
 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
66 of 103

PDF PAGE 67
MS-ESS1  Earth’s Place in the Universe 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practice or Disciplinary  C ore Idea.  
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting C oncepts, and C ore Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National A cademy  of Sciences.  
MS-ESS1     Earth’s Place in the Universe  
Students who demonstrate understanding can:  
MS-ESS1-1.  Develop and use a model of the Earth -sun-moon system to describe the cyclic patterns of lunar phases, 
eclipses of the sun and moon, and seasons.  [C larification Statement:  Examples of models can be phy sical, graphical, or conceptual.] 
MS-ESS1-2.  Develop and use a model to describe the role of gravity in the motions within galaxies and the solar system.   
[C larification Statement:  Emphasis for the model is on gravity as the force that holds together the solar sy stem and Milky Way galaxy and controls orbital motions 
within them. Examples of models can be physical (such as the analogy of distance along a football field or computer visualizations of elliptical orbits) or 
conceptual (such as mathematical proportions relative to the size of familiar objects such as students’ school or state).] [A ssessment Boundary:  A ssessment does 
not include Kepler’s Laws of orbital motion or the apparent retrograde motion of the planets as viewed from Earth.] 
MS-ESS1-3.  Analyze and interpret data to determine scale properties of  objects in the solar system .  [C larification Statement:  
Emphasis is on the analy sis of data from Earth-based instruments, space-based telescopes, and spacecraft to determine similarities and differences among solar 
sy stem objects. Examples of scale properties include the sizes of an object’s layers (such as crust and atmosphere), surface features (such as v olcanoes), and 
orbital radius. Examples of data include statistical information, drawings and photographs, and models.] [A ssessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include 
recalling facts about properties of the planets and other solar sy stem bodies.] 
MS-ESS1-4.  Construct a scientific explanation based on evidence from  rock strata for how the geologic time scale is used 
to organize Earth’s 4.6-billion-year -old history .  [C larification Statement:  Emphasis is on how analyses of rock formations and the fossils 
they  contain are used to establish relative ages of major events in Earth’s history. Examples of Earth’s major events could range from being very recent (such as 
the last Ice A ge or the earliest fossils of homo sapiens) to v ery old (such as the formation of Earth or the earliest evidence of life). Examples can include the 
formation of mountain chains and ocean basins, the evolution or extinction of particular liv ing organisms, or significant volcanic eruptions.] [A ssessment 
Boundary :  Assessment does not include recalling the names of specific periods or epochs and events within them.] 
The performance expectations abov e were dev eloped using the following elements from the NRC  document A  Framework for K -12 Science Education: 
 
Science and Engineering Practices  
Developing and Using Models 
Modeling in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences and 
progresses to dev eloping, using, and revising models to 
describe, test, and predict more abstract phenomena 
and design sy stems. 
 Dev elop and use a model to describe phenomena. 
(MS -ESS1-1),(MS-ESS1-2)  
A nalyzing and Interpreting Data 
A nalyzing data in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences and 
progresses to extending quantitative analysis to 
inv estigations, distinguishing between correlation and 
causation, and basic statistical techniques of data and 
error analy sis. 
 A nalyze and interpret data to determine similarities 
and differences in findings. (MS -ESS1-3) 
Constructing Explanations and Designing 
Solutions  
C onstructing explanations and designing solutions in 6–
8 builds on K–5 experiences and progresses to include 
constructing explanations and designing solutions 
supported by  multiple sources of evidence consistent 
with scientific ideas, principles, and theories. 
 C onstruct a scientific explanation based on valid 
and reliable ev idence obtained from sources 
(including the students’ own experiments) and the 
assumption that theories and laws that describe the 
natural world operate today as they did in the past 
and will continue to do so in the future. (MS -ESS1-
4) 
 
Disciplinary Core Ideas  
ESS1 .A:  The Universe and Its Stars 
 Patterns of the apparent motion of the sun, the moon, and stars in 
the sky  can be observ ed, described, predicted, and explained with 
models. (MS -ESS1-1) 
 Earth and its solar sy stem are part of the Milky Way galaxy, which is 
one of many  galaxies in the univ erse. (MS-ESS1-2) 
ESS1 .B:  Earth and the Solar System 
 The solar sy stem consists of the sun and a collection of objects, 
including planets, their moons, and asteroids that are held in orbit 
around the sun by  its grav itational pull on them. (MS-ESS1-2),(MS-
ESS1 -3) 
 This model of the solar sy stem can explain eclipses of the sun and 
the moon. Earth’s spin axis is fixed in direction ov er the short-term 
but tilted relativ e to its orbit around the sun. The seasons are a 
result of that tilt and are caused by  the differential intensity of 
sunlight on different areas of Earth across the y ear. (MS-ESS1-1) 
 The solar sy stem appears to have formed from a disk of dust and 
gas, drawn together by gravity. (MS-ESS1-2) 
ESS1 .C:  The History of Planet Earth 
 The geologic time scale interpreted from rock strata provides a way 
to organize Earth’s history . Analyses of rock strata and the fossil 
record prov ide only  relative dates, not an absolute scale. (MS-ESS1-
4) 
 
Crosscutting Concepts  
Patterns  
 Patterns can be used to identify  cause-
and-effect relationships. (MS-ESS1-1) 
Scale, Proportion, and Quantity 
 Time, space, and energy phenomena can 
be observ ed at v arious scales using models 
to study  sy stems that are too large or too 
small. (MS -ESS1-3),(MS-ESS1-4) 
Systems and System Models 
 Models can be used to represent sy stems 
and their interactions. (MS -ESS1-2) 
 
----------------------------------------------- 
Connection s to Engineering, T echnology,  
and A pplications of Science  
 
Interdependence of Science, 
Engineering, and Technology  
 Engineering advances have led to 
important discov eries in v irtually every 
field of science and scientific discov eries 
hav e led to the dev elopment of entire 
industries and engineered sy stems. (MS-
ESS1 -3) 
 
----------------------------------------------- 
Connection s to Nature of Science  
 
Scientific Knowledge Assumes an Order 
and Consistency in Natural Systems 
 Science assumes that objects and events 
in natural sy stems occur in consistent 
patterns that are understandable through 
measurement and observation. (MS-ESS1-
1),(MS -ESS1-2) 
C onnections to other DCIs in this grade-band:  MS.PS2.A (MS-ESS1-1),(MS-ESS1-2); MS.PS2.B (MS-ESS1-1),(MS-ESS1-2); MS.LS4.A (MS-ESS1-4); MS.LS4.C (MS-ESS1-4); 
MS.ESS2.A  (MS-ESS1-3) 
A rticulation of DCIs across grade-bands:  3 .PS2.A (MS-ESS1-1),(MS-ESS1-2); 3.LS4.A (MS-ESS1-4); 3 .LS4.C (MS-ESS1-4); 4 .ESS1.C (MS-ESS1-4); 5 .PS2.B (MS-ESS1-1),(MS-ESS1-
2); 5 .ESS1.A (MS-ESS1-2); 5 .ESS1.B (MS-ESS1-1),(MS-ESS1-2),(5-ESS1-3); HS.PS1.C (MS-ESS1-4); HS.PS2.A (MS-ESS1-1),(MS-ESS1-2); HS.PS2.B (MS-ESS1-1),(MS-ESS1-2); 
HS.LS4.A  (MS-ESS1-4); HS.LS4.C (MS-ESS1-4); HS.ESS1.A (MS-ESS1-2); HS.ESS1.B (MS-ESS1-1),(MS-ESS1-2),(MS-ESS1-3); HS.ESS1.C (MS-ESS1-4); HS.ESS2.A (MS-ESS1-
3),(MS -ESS1-4) 
C ommon Core State Standards Connections:  
ELA /Literacy –  
RST .6-8.1   C ite specific textual evidence to support analysis of science and technical texts.  (MS-ESS1-3),(MS-ESS1-4) 
RST .6-8.7  Integrate quantitative or technical information expressed in words in a text with a v ersion of that information expressed visually (e.g., in a flowchart, diagram, 
model, graph, or table). (MS -ESS1-3) 
WHST .6-8.2  Write informativ e/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas, concepts, and information through the selection, organization, and analysis of relevant 
content. (MS-ESS1-4) 
SL.8 .5  Integrate multimedia and visual displays into presentations to clarify information, strengthen claims and evidence, and add interest. (MS-ESS1-1),(MS-ESS1-2) 
Mathematics –  
MP.2   Reason abstractly and quantitatively. (MS-ESS1-3) 
MP.4   Model with mathematics. (MS-ESS1-1),(MS-ESS1-2) 
6 .RP.A.1  Understand the concept of a ratio and use ratio language to describe a ratio relationship between two quantities. (MS-ESS1-1),(MS-ESS1-2),(MS-ESS1-3) 
April 2014
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
1 of 2
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
67 of 103

PDF PAGE 68
MS-ESS1  Earth’s Place in the Universe 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering through a Practice or Disciplinary  C ore Idea.  
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting C oncepts, and C ore Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National A cademy  of Sciences.  
7 .RP.A.2  Recognize and represent proportional relationships between quantities. (MS-ESS1-1),(MS-ESS1-2),(MS-ESS1-3) 
6 .EE.B.6 Use v ariables to represent numbers and write expressions when solving a real-world or mathematical problem; understand that a v ariable can represent an 
unknown number, or, depending on the purpose at hand, any number in a specified set. (MS-ESS1-2),(MS-ESS1-4) 
7 .EE.B.4 Use v ariables to represent quantities in a real-world or mathematical problem, and construct simple equations and inequalities to solve problems by reasoning 
about the quantities. (MS -ESS1-2),(MS-ESS1-4) 
 
April 2014
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
2 of 2
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
68 of 103

PDF PAGE 69
MS-ESS2  Earth’s Systems 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate  traditional science content with engineering through a Practice or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
MS-ESS2     Earth’s Systems 
Students who demonstrate understanding can:  
MS-ESS2-1. Develop a model to describe the cycling of Earth’s materials and the flow of energy that drives this process.  
[Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on the processes of melting, crystallization, weathering, deformation, and sedimentati on, which act together to form minerals 
and rocks through the cycling of Earth’s materials.] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include the identification and naming of minerals.]  
MS-ESS2-2. Construct an explanation based on evidence for how geoscience processes have changed Earth’s surface at 
varying time and spatial scales.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on how processes change Earth’s surface at time and spatial scales that can be 
large (such as slow plate motions or the uplift of large mountain ranges) or small (such as rapid landslides or microscopic g eochemical reactions), and how many 
geoscience processes (such as earthquakes, volcanoes, and meteor impacts) usually behave gradually but are punctuated by catastr ophic events. Examples of 
geoscience processes include surface weathering and deposition by the movements of water, ice, and wind. Emphasis is on geoscience processes that shape local 
geographic features, where appropriate.] 
MS-ESS2-3. Analyze and interpret data on the distribution of fossils and rocks, continental shapes, and seafloor structures to 
provide evidence of the past plate motions.  [Clarification Statement:  Examples of data include similarities of rock and fossil types on different 
continents, the shapes of the continents (including continental shelves), and the locations of ocean structures (such as ridg es, fracture zones, and trenches).] 
[Assessment Boundary:  Paleomagnetic anomalies in oceanic and continental crust are not assessed.]  
MS-ESS2-4. Develop a model to describe the cycling of water through Earth’s systems driven by energy from the sun and the 
force of gravity.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on the ways water changes its state as it moves through the multiple pathways of the h ydrologic 
cycle. Examples of models can be conceptual or physical.] [Assessment Boundary:  A quantitative understanding of the latent heats of vaporization and fusion is not 
assessed.]  
MS-ESS2-5. Collect data to provide evidence for how the motions and complex interactions of air masses result in changes in 
weather conditions.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on how air masses flow from regions of high pressure to low pressure, causing weather (defined 
by temperature, pressure, humidity, precipitation, and wind) at a fixed location to change over time, and how sudden changes in weather can result when different 
air masses collide. Emphasis is on how weather can be predicted within probabilistic ranges. Examples of data can be provided  to students (such as weather maps, 
diagrams, and visualizations) or obtained through laboratory experime nts (such as with condensation).] [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not include 
recalling the names of cloud types or weather symbols used on weather maps or the reported diagrams from weather stations.]   
MS-ESS2-6. Develop and use a model to describe how unequal heating and rotation of the Earth cause patterns of 
atmospheric and oceanic circulation that determine regional climates.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on how patterns vary 
by latitude, altitude, and geographic land distribution. Emphasis of atmospheric circulation is on the sunlight -driven latitudinal banding, the Coriolis effect, and 
resulting prevailing winds; emphasis of ocean circulation is on the transfer of heat by the global ocean convection cycle, which is constrained by the Coriolis effect 
and the outlines of continents. Examples of models can be diagrams, maps and globes, or digital representations.]  [Assessment Boundary:  Assessment does not 
include the dynamics of the Coriolis effect.] 
The performance expectations above were developed using the following elements from the NRC document  A Framework for K-12 Science Education: 
 
Science and Engineering Practices 
Developing and Using Models 
Modeling in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences and progresses to 
developing, using, and revising models to describe, test, and 
predict more abstract phenomena and design systems. 
▪ Develop and use a model to describe phenomena. (MS-
ESS2-1),(MS-ESS2-6) 
▪ Develop a model to describe unobservable mechanisms. 
(MS-ESS2-4) 
Planning and Carrying Out Investigations 
Planning and carrying out investigations in 6-8 builds on K-5 
experiences and progresses to include investigations that use 
multiple variables and provide evidence to support 
explanations or solutions. 
▪ Collect data to produce data to serve as the basis for 
evidence to answer scientific questions or test design 
solutions under a range of conditions. (MS-ESS2-5) 
Analyzing and Interpreting Data 
Analyzing data in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences and 
progresses to extending quantitative analysis to 
investigations, distinguishing between correlation and 
causation, and basic statistical techniques of data and error 
analysis.  
▪ Analyze and interpret data to provide evidence for 
phenomena. (MS-ESS2-3) 
Constructing Explanations and Designing Solutions  
Constructing explanations and designing solutions in 6–8 
builds on K–5 experiences and progresses to include 
constructing explanations and designing solutions supported 
by multiple sources of evidence consistent with scientific 
ideas, principles, and theories. 
▪ Construct a scientific explanation based on valid and 
reliable evidence obtained from sources (including the 
students’ own experiments) and the assumption that 
theories and laws that describe nature operate today as 
they did in the past and will continue to do so in the 
future. (MS-ESS2-2) 
 
--------------------------------------------------  
Connections to Nature of Science 
 
Scientific Knowledge is Open to Revision in Light of 
New Evidence 
 
Disciplinary Core Ideas 
ESS1.C:  The History of Planet Earth 
▪ Tectonic processes continually generate new ocean sea floor at ridges 
and destroy old sea floor at trenches. (HS.ESS1.C GBE) (secondary to 
MS-ESS2-3) 
ESS2.A:  Earth’s Materials and Systems 
▪ All Earth processes are the result of energy flowing and matter cycling 
within and among the planet’s systems. This energy is derived from the 
sun and Earth’s hot interior. The energy that flows and matter that 
cycles produce chemical and physical changes in Earth’s materials and 
living organisms. (MS-ESS2-1) 
▪ The planet’s systems interact over scales that range from microscopic to 
global in size, and they operate over fractions of a second to billions of 
years. These interactions have shaped Earth’s history and will determine 
its future. (MS-ESS2-2) 
ESS2.B:  Plate Tectonics and Large-Scale System Interactions 
▪ Maps of ancient land and water patterns, based on investigations of 
rocks and fossils, make clear how Earth’s plates have moved great 
distances, collided, and spread apart. (MS-ESS2-3) 
ESS2.C:  The Roles of Water in Earth’s Surface Processes  
▪ Water continually cycles among land, ocean, and atmosphere via 
transpiration, evaporation, condensation and crystallization, and 
precipitation, as well as downhill flows on land. (MS-ESS2-4) 
▪ The complex patterns of the changes and the movement of water in the 
atmosphere, determined by winds, landforms, and ocean temperatures 
and currents, are major determinants of local weather patterns. (MS-
ESS2-5) 
▪ Global movements of water and its changes in form are propelled by 
sunlight and gravity. (MS-ESS2-4) 
▪ Variations in density due to variations in temperature and salinity drive 
a global pattern of interconnected ocean currents. (MS-ESS2-6) 
▪ Water’s movements—both on the land and underground—cause 
weathering and erosion, which change the land’s surface features and 
create underground formations. (MS-ESS2-2) 
ESS2.D:  Weather and Climate 
▪ Weather and climate are influenced by interactions involving sunlight, 
the ocean, the atmosphere, ice, landforms, and living things. These 
interactions vary with latitude, altitude, and local and regional 
geography, all of which can affect oceanic and atmospheric flow 
patterns. (MS-ESS2-6) 
▪ Because these patterns are so complex, weather can only be predicted 
probabilistically. (MS-ESS2-5) 
▪ The ocean exerts a major influence on weather and climate by 
 
Crosscutting Concepts 
Patterns 
▪ Patterns in rates of change and other 
numerical relationships can provide 
information about natural systems. 
(MS-ESS2-3)  
Cause and Effect 
▪ Cause and effect relationships may 
be used to predict phenomena in 
natural or designed systems. (MS-
ESS2-5) 
Scale Proportion and Quantity 
▪ Time, space, and energy phenomena 
can be observed at various scales 
using models to study systems that 
are too large or too small. (MS-ESS2-
2) 
Systems and System Models 
▪ Models can be used to represent 
systems and their interactions—such 
as inputs, processes and outputs—
and energy, matter, and information 
flows within systems. (MS-ESS2-6) 
Energy and Matter 
▪ Within a natural or designed system, 
the transfer of energy drives the 
motion and/or cycling of matter. 
(MS-ESS2-4) 
Stability and Change 
▪ Explanations of stability and change 
in natural or designed systems can 
be constructed by examining the 
changes over time and processes at 
different scales, including the atomic 
scale. (MS-ESS2-1) 
 
 
 
 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
69 of 103

PDF PAGE 70
MS-ESS2  Earth’s Systems 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate  traditional science content with engineering through a Practice or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
▪ Science findings are frequently revised and/or 
reinterpreted based on new evidence. (MS-ESS2-3) 
absorbing energy from the sun, releasing it over time, and globally 
redistributing it through ocean currents. (MS-ESS2-6) 
Connections to other DCIs in this grade-band:  MS.PS1.A (MS-ESS2-1),(MS-ESS2-4),(MS-ESS2-5); MS.PS1.B (MS-ESS2-1),(MS-ESS2-2); MS.PS2.A (MS-ESS2-5),(MS-ESS2-6); 
MS.PS2.B (MS-ESS2-4); MS.PS3.A (MS-ESS2-4),(MS-ESS2-5); MS.PS3.B (MS-ESS2-1),(MS-ESS2-5),(MS-ESS2-6); MS.PS3.D (MS-ESS2-4); MS.PS4.B (MS-ESS2-6); MS.LS2.B (MS-
ESS2-1),(MS-ESS2-2); MS.LS2.C (MS-ESS2-1); MS.LS4.A (MS-ESS2-3); MS.ESS1.B (MS-ESS2-1); MS.ESS3.C (MS-ESS2-1) 
Articulation of DCIs across grade-bands:  3.PS2.A (MS-ESS2-4),(MS-ESS2-6); 3.LS4.A (MS-ESS2-3); 3.ESS2.D (MS-ESS2-5),(MS-ESS2-6); 3.ESS3.B (MS-ESS2-3); 4.PS3.B (MS-ESS2-
1),(MS-ESS2-4); 4.ESS1.C (MS-ESS2-2),(MS-ESS2-3); 4.ESS2.A (MS-ESS2-1),(MS-ESS2-2); 4.ESS2.B (MS-ESS2-3); 4.ESS2.E (MS-ESS2-2); 4.ESS3.B (MS-ESS2-3); 5.PS2.B (MS-
ESS2-4); 5.ESS2.A (MS-ESS2-1),(MS-ESS2-2),(MS-ESS2-5),(MS-ESS2-6); 5.ESS2.C (MS-ESS2-4); HS.PS1.B (MS-ESS2-1); HS.PS2.B (MS-ESS2-4),(MS-ESS2-6); HS.PS3.B (MS-ESS2-
1),(MS-ESS2-4); HS.PS3.D (MS-ESS2-2),(MS-ESS2-6); HS.PS4.B (MS-ESS2-4); HS.LS1.C (MS-ESS2-1); HS.LS2.B (MS-ESS2-1),(MS-ESS2-2); HS.LS4.A (MS-ESS2-3); HS.LS4.C (MS-
ESS2-3); HS.ESS1.B (MS-ESS2-6); HS.ESS1.C (MS-ESS2-2),(MS-ESS2-3); HS.ESS2.A (MS-ESS2-1),(MS-ESS2-2),(MS-ESS2-3),(MS-ESS2-4),(MS-ESS2-6); HS.ESS2.B (MS-ESS2-2),(MS-
ESS2-3); HS.ESS2.C (MS-ESS2-1),(MS-ESS2-2),(MS-ESS2-4),(MS-ESS2-5); HS.ESS2.D (MS-ESS2-2),(MS-ESS2-4),(MS-ESS2-5),(MS-ESS2-6); HS.ESS2.E (MS-ESS2-1),(MS-ESS2-2); 
HS.ESS3.D (MS-ESS2-2) 
Common Core State Standards Connections:  
ELA/Literacy –  
RST.6-8.1   Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of science and technical texts.  (MS -ESS2-2),(MS-ESS2-3),(MS-ESS2-5) 
RST.6-8.7  Integrate quantitative or technical information expressed in words in a text with a version of that information expressed visually (e.g., in a flowchart, diagram, 
model, graph, or table). (MS-ESS2-3) 
RST.6-8.9 Compare and contrast the information gained from experiments, simulations, video, or multimedia sources with that gained from  reading a text on the same topic. 
(MS-ESS2-3),(MS-ESS2-5) 
WHST.6-8.2  Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas, concepts, and information through the selection, org anization, and analysis of relevant 
content. (MS-ESS2-2) 
WHST.6-8.8   Gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources, using search terms effectively; assess the credibility and accu racy of each source; and quote or 
paraphrase the data and conclusions of others while avoiding plagiarism and following a standard format for citation. (MS-ESS2-5) 
SL.8.5  Integrate multimedia and visual displays into presentations to clarify information, strengthen claims and evidence, and add i nterest. (MS-ESS2-1),(MS-ESS2-2),(MS-
ESS2-6) 
Mathematics –  
MP.2  Reason abstractly and quantitatively. (MS-ESS2-2),(MS-ESS2-3),(MS-ESS2-5) 
6.NS.C.5  Understand that positive and negative numbers are used together to describe quantities having opposite directions or values ( e.g., temperature above/below zero, 
elevation above/below sea level, credits/debits, positive/negative electric charge); use positive and negative numbers to represent quantities in real -world contexts, 
explaining the meaning of 0 in each situation. (MS-ESS2-5) 
6.EE.B.6 Use variables to represent numbers and write expressions when solving a real-world or mathematical problem; understand that a variable can represent an 
unknown number, or, depending on the purpose at hand, any number in a specified set.  (MS-ESS2-2),(MS-ESS2-3) 
7.EE.B.4 Use variables to represent quantities in a real-world or mathematical problem, and construct simple equations and inequalities to solve problems by reasoning 
about the quantities. (MS-ESS2-2),(MS-ESS2-3) 
 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
70 of 103

PDF PAGE 71
MS-ESS3  Earth and Human Activity 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering throu gh a Practice or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
MS-ESS3     Earth and Human Activity 
Students who demonstrate understanding can: 
MS-ESS3-1. Construct a scientific explanation based on evidence for how the uneven distributions of Earth’s mineral, energy, 
and groundwater resources are the result of past and current geoscience processes.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on 
how these resources are limited and typically non-renewable, and how their distributions are significantly changing as a result of removal by humans. Examples of 
uneven distributions of resources as a result of past processes include but are not limited to petroleum (locations of the burial of organic marine sediments and 
subsequent geologic traps), metal ores (locations of past volcanic and hydrothermal activity associated with subduction zones), and soil (locations of active weathering 
and/or deposition of rock).] 
MS-ESS3-2. Analyze and interpret data on natural hazards to forecast future catastrophic events and inform the development 
of technologies to mitigate their effects.  [Clarification Statement:  Emphasis is on how some natural hazards, such as volcanic eruptions and severe 
weather, are preceded by phenomena that allow for reliable predictions,  but others, such as earthquakes, occur suddenly and with no notice, and thus are not yet 
predictable. Examples of natural hazards can be taken from interior processes (such as earthquakes and volcanic eruptions), surface processes (such as mass wasting 
and tsunamis), or severe weather events (such as hurricanes, tornadoes, and floods). Examples of data can include the locations, magnitudes, and frequencies of the 
natural hazards. Examples of technologies can be global (such as satellite systems to monitor hurricanes or forest fires) or local (such as building basements in tornado-
prone regions or reservoirs to mitigate droughts).] 
MS-ESS3-3. Apply scientific principles to design a method for monitoring and minimizing a human impact on the environment.*  
[Clarification Statement:  Examples of the design process include examining human environmental impacts, assessing the kinds of solutions that are feasible, and 
designing and evaluating solutions that could reduce that impact. Examples of human impacts can include water usage (such as the withdrawal of water from streams 
and aquifers or the construction of dams and levees), land usage (such as urban development, agriculture, or the removal of wetlands), and pollution (such as of the 
air, water, or land).]  
MS-ESS3-4. Construct an argument supported by evidence for how increases in human population and per-capita consumption 
of natural resources impact Earth’s systems.  [Clarification Statement:  Examples of evidence include grade-appropriate databases on human 
populations and the rates of consumption of food and natural resources (such as freshwater, mineral, and energy). Examples of impacts can include changes to the 
appearance, composition, and structure of Earth’s systems as well as the rates at which they change . The consequences of increases in human populations and 
consumption of natural resources are described by science, but science does not make the decisions for the actions society ta kes.] 
MS-ESS3-5. Ask questions to clarify evidence of the factors that have caused the rise in global temperatures over the past 
century.  [Clarification Statement:  Examples of factors include human activities (such as fossil fuel combustion, cement production, and agricultural activity) a nd 
natural processes (such as changes in incoming solar radiation or volcanic activity). Examples of evidence can include tables, graphs, and maps of global and regional 
temperatures, atmospheric levels of gases such as carbon dioxide and methane, and the rates of human activities. Emphasis is on the major role that human activities 
play in causing the rise in global temperatures.] 
The performance expectations above were developed using the following elements from the NRC document  A Framework for K-12 Science Education: 
 
Science and Engineering Practices 
Asking Questions and Defining Problems 
Asking questions and defining problems in grades 6–8 
builds on grades K–5 experiences and progresses to 
specifying relationships between variables, and clarifying 
arguments and models. 
▪ Ask questions to identify and clarify evidence of an 
argument. (MS-ESS3-5) 
Analyzing and Interpreting Data 
Analyzing data in 6–8 builds on K–5 and progresses to 
extending quantitative analysis to investigations, 
distinguishing between correlation and causation, and 
basic statistical techniques of data and error analysis. 
▪ Analyze and interpret data to determine similarities 
and differences in findings. (MS-ESS3-2)  
Constructing Explanations and Designing Solutions  
Constructing explanations and designing solutions in 6–8 
builds on K–5 experiences and progresses to include 
constructing explanations and designing solutions 
supported by multiple sources of evidence consistent with 
scientific ideas, principles, and theories. 
▪ Construct a scientific explanation based on valid and 
reliable evidence obtained from sources (including the 
students’ own experiments) and the assumption that 
theories and laws that describe the natural world 
operate today as they did in the past and will continue 
to do so in the future. (MS-ESS3-1) 
▪ Apply scientific principles to design an object, tool, 
process or system. (MS-ESS3-3) 
Engaging in Argument from Evidence 
Engaging in argument from evidence in 6–8 builds on K–5 
experiences and progresses to constructing a convincing 
argument that supports or refutes claims for either 
explanations or solutions about the natural and designed 
world(s). 
▪ Construct an oral and written argument supported by 
empirical evidence and scientific reasoning to support 
or refute an explanation or a model for a phenomenon 
or a solution to a problem. (MS-ESS3-4) 
 
 
Disciplinary Core Ideas 
ESS3.A:  Natural Resources 
▪ Humans depend on Earth’s land, ocean, atmosphere, 
and biosphere for many different resources. Minerals, 
fresh water, and biosphere resources are limited, and 
many are not renewable or replaceable over human 
lifetimes. These resources are distributed unevenly 
around the planet as a result of past geologic 
processes. (MS-ESS3-1) 
ESS3.B:  Natural Hazards  
▪ Mapping the history of natural hazards in a region, 
combined with an understanding of related geologic 
forces can help forecast the locations and likelihoods of 
future events. (MS-ESS3-2) 
ESS3.C:  Human Impacts on Earth Systems 
▪ Human activities have significantly altered the 
biosphere, sometimes damaging or destroying natural 
habitats and causing the extinction of other species. But 
changes to Earth’s environments can have different 
impacts (negative and positive) for different living 
things. (MS-ESS3-3) 
▪ Typically as human populations and per-capita 
consumption of natural resources increase, so do the 
negative impacts on Earth unless the activities and 
technologies involved are engineered otherwise. (MS-
ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4) 
ESS3.D:  Global Climate Change 
▪ Human activities, such as the release of greenhouse 
gases from burning fossil fuels, are major factors in the 
current rise in Earth’s mean surface temperature (global 
warming). Reducing the level of climate change and 
reducing human vulnerability to whatever climate 
changes do occur depend on the understanding of 
climate science, engineering capabilities, and other 
kinds of knowledge, such as understanding of human 
behavior and on applying that knowledge wisely in 
decisions and activities. (MS-ESS3-5) 
  
 
Crosscutting Concepts 
Patterns 
▪ Graphs, charts, and images can be used to identify 
patterns in data. (MS-ESS3-2) 
Cause and Effect 
▪ Relationships can be classified as causal or correlational, 
and correlation does not necessarily imply causation. 
(MS-ESS3-3) 
▪ Cause and effect relationships may be used to predict 
phenomena in natural or designed systems. (MS-ESS3-
1),(MS-ESS3-4) 
Stability and Change 
▪ Stability might be disturbed either by sudden events or 
gradual changes that accumulate over time. (MS-ESS3-5) 
 
------------------------------------------------ 
Connections to Engineering, Technology, 
and Applications of Science 
 
Influence of Science, Engineering, and Technology on 
Society and the Natural World  
▪ All human activity draws on natural resources and has 
both short and long-term consequences, positive as well 
as negative, for the health of people and the natural 
environment. (MS-ESS3-1),(MS-ESS3-4) 
▪ The uses of technologies and any limitations on their use 
are driven by individual or societal needs, desires, and 
values; by the findings of scientific research; and by 
differences in such factors as climate, natural resources, 
and economic conditions. Thus technology use varies 
from region to region and over time. (MS-ESS3-2),(MS-
ESS3-3) 
 
----------------------------------------------- 
Connections to Nature of Science 
  
Science Addresses Questions About the Natural and 
Material World 
▪ Scientific knowledge can describe the consequences of 
actions but does not necessarily prescribe the decisions 
that society takes. (MS-ESS3-4) 
Connections to other DCIs in this grade-band:  MS.PS1.A (MS-ESS3-1); MS.PS1.B (MS-ESS3-1); MS.PS3.A (MS-ESS3-5); MS.PS3.C (MS-ESS3-2); MS.LS2.A (MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4); 
MS.LS2.C (MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4); MS.LS4.D (MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4); MS.ESS2.D (MS-ESS3-1) 
Articulation of DCIs across grade-bands: 3.LS2.C (MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4); 3.LS4.D (MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4); 3.ESS3.B (MS-ESS3-2); 4.PS3.D (MS-ESS3-1); 4.ESS3.A (MS-ESS3-1); 
4.ESS3.B (MS-ESS3-2);  5.ESS3.C (MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4); HS.PS3.B (MS-ESS3-1),(MS-ESS3-5); HS.PS4.B (MS-ESS3-5); HS.LS1.C (MS-ESS3-1); HS.LS2.A (MS-ESS3-4); HS.LS2.C 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
71 of 103

PDF PAGE 72
MS-ESS3  Earth and Human Activity 
*The performance expectations marked with an asterisk integrate traditional science content with engineering throu gh a Practice or Disciplinary Core Idea. 
The section entitled “Disciplinary Core Ideas” is reproduced verbatim from A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Cross-Cutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.  Integrated 
and reprinted with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
(MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4); HS.LS4.C (MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4); HS.LS4.D (MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4); HS.ESS2.A (MS-ESS3-1),(MS-ESS3-5); HS.ESS2.B (MS-ESS3-1),(MS-ESS3-2); 
HS.ESS2.C (MS-ESS3-1),(MS-ESS3-3); HS.ESS2.D (MS-ESS3-2),(MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-5); HS.ESS2.E (MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4); HS.ESS3.A (MS-ESS3-1),(MS-ESS3-4); HS.ESS3.B 
(MS-ESS3-2); HS.ESS3.C (MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4),(MS-ESS3-5); HS.ESS3.D (MS-ESS3-2);(MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-5) 
Common Core State Standards Connections:  
ELA/Literacy –  
RST.6-8.1   Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of science and technical texts.  (MS-ESS3-1),(MS-ESS3-2),(MS-ESS3-4),(MS-ESS3-5) 
RST.6-8.7  Integrate quantitative or technical information expressed in words in a text with a version of that information expressed vis ually (e.g., in a flowchart, diagram, 
model, graph, or table). (MS-ESS3-2) 
WHST.6-8.1   Write arguments focused on discipline content. (MS-ESS3-4) 
WHST.6-8.2   Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas, concepts, and information through the selection, organization, and analysis of relevant 
content. (MS-ESS3-1) 
WHST.6-8.7  Conduct short research projects to answer a question (including a self -generated question), drawing on several sources and generating additional related, focused 
questions that allow for multiple avenues of exploration. (MS-ESS3-3) 
WHST.6-8.8  Gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources, using search terms effectively; assess the credibility a nd accuracy of each source; and quote or 
paraphrase the data and conclusions of others while avoiding plagiarism and following a standard format for citation.  (MS-ESS3-3) 
WHST.6-8.9  Draw evidence from informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research. (MS -ESS3-1),(MS-ESS3-4) 
Mathematics –  
MP.2  Reason abstractly and quantitatively. (MS-ESS3-2),(MS-ESS3-5) 
6.RP.A.1  Understand the concept of a ratio and use ratio language to describe a ratio relationship between two quantities.  (MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4) 
7.RP.A.2  Recognize and represent proportional relationships between quantities. (MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4) 
6.EE.B.6 Use variables to represent numbers and write expressions when solving a real -world or mathematical problem; understand that a variable can represent an unknown 
number, or, depending on the purpose at hand, any number in a specified set. (MS-ESS3-1),(MS-ESS3-2),(MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4),(MS-ESS3-5) 
7.EE.B.4 Use variables to represent quantities in a real-world or mathematical problem, and construct simple equations and inequalities to solve problems by reasoning about 
the quantities. (MS-ESS3-1),(MS-ESS3-2),(MS-ESS3-3),(MS-ESS3-4),(MS-ESS3-5) 
 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
72 of 103

PDF PAGE 73
 
 
 
Middle School Engineering Design 
 
By the time students reach middle school they should have had numerous experiences in 
engineering design.  The goal for middle school students is to define problems more 
precisely, to conduct a more thorough process of choosing the best solution, and to 
optimize the final design.   
Defining the problem with “precision” involves thinking more deeply than is expected in 
elementary school about the needs a problem is intended to address, or the goals a 
design is intended to reach. How will the end user decide whether or not the design is 
successful? Also at this level students are expected to consider not only the end user, but 
also the broader society and the environment.  Every technological change is likely to 
have both intended and unintended effects.  It is up to the designer to try to anticipate 
the effects it may have, and to behave responsibly in developing a new or improved 
technology.  These considerations may take the form of either criteria or constraints on 
possible solutions. 
Developing possible solutions does not explicitly address generating design ideas 
since students were expected to develop the capability in elementary school.  The focus in 
middle school is on a two stage process of evaluating the different ideas that have been 
proposed: by using a systematic method, such as a tradeoff matrix, to determine which 
solutions are most promising, and by testing different solutions, and then combining the 
best ideas into new solution that may be better than any of the preliminary ideas.  
Improving designs at the middle school level involves an iterative process in which 
students test the best design, analyze the results, modify the design accordingly, and then 
re-test and modify the design again.  Students may go through this cycle two, three, or 
more times in order to reach the optimal (best possible) result.  
Connections with other science disciplines help students develop these capabilities in 
various contexts.  For example, in the life sciences students apply their engineering design 
capabilities to evaluate plans for maintaining biodiversity and ecosystem services (MS-LS2-
5). In the physical sciences students define and solve problems involving a number of core 
ideas in physical science, including: chemical processes that release or absorb energy 
(MS-PS1-6), Newton’s third law of motion (MS-PS2-1), and energy transfer (MS-PS3-3). In 
the Earth and space sciences students apply their engineering design capabilities to 
problems related the impacts of humans on Earth systems (MS-ESS3-3).  
By the end of 8th grade students are expected to achieve all four performance 
expectations (MS-ETS1-1, MS-ETS1-2, MS-ETS1-3, and MS-ETS1-4) related to a single 
problem in order to understand the interrelated processes of engineering design.  These 
include defining a problem by precisely specifying criteria and constraints for solutions as 
well as potential impacts on society and the natural environment, systematically 
evaluating alternative solutions, analyzing data from tests of different solutions and 
combining the best ideas into an improved solution, and developing a model and 
iteratively testing and improving it to reach an optimal solution. While the performance 
expectations shown in Middle School Engineering Design couple particular practices with 
specific disciplinary core ideas, instructional decisions should include use of many practices 
that lead to the performance expectations. 
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
73 of 103

PDF PAGE 74
MS-ETS1  Engineering Design 
MS-ETS1  Engineering Design 
Students who demonstrate understanding can: 
MS-ETS1-1. Define the criteria and constraints of a design problem with sufficient precision to ensure a successful solution, 
taking into account relevant scientific principles and potential impacts on people and the natural environment 
that may limit possible solutions.  
 
MS-ETS1-2. Evaluate competing design solutions using a systematic process to determine how well they meet the criteria 
and constraints of the problem.  
 
MS-ETS1-3. Analyze data from tests to determine similarities and differences among several design solutions to identify 
the best characteristics of each that can be combined into a new solution to better meet the criteria for 
success.  
 
MS-ETS1-4. Develop a model to generate data for iterative testing and modification of a proposed object, tool, or process 
such that an optimal design can be achieved. 
The performance expectations above were developed using the following elements from the NRC document  A Framework for K-12 Science Education: 
 
Science and Engineering Practices 
Asking Questions and Defining Problems  
Asking questions and defining problems in grades 6–8 builds on 
grades K–5 experiences and progresses to specifying 
relationships between variables, and clarifying arguments and 
models. 
 Define a design problem that can be solved through the 
development of an object, tool, process or system and 
includes multiple criteria and constraints, including scientific 
knowledge that may limit possible solutions. (MS-ETS1-1) 
Developing and Using Models 
Modeling in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences and progresses to 
developing, using, and revising models to describe, test, and 
predict more abstract phenomena and design systems. 
 Develop a model to generate data to test ideas about 
designed systems, including those representing inputs and 
outputs. (MS-ETS1-4) 
Analyzing and Interpreting Data 
Analyzing data in 6–8 builds on K–5 experiences and progresses 
to extending quantitative analysis to investigations, 
distinguishing between correlation and causation, and basic 
statistical techniques of data and error analysis.  
 Analyze and interpret data to determine similarities and 
differences in findings. (MS-ETS1-3) 
Engaging in Argument from Evidence 
Engaging in argument from evidence in 6–8 builds on K–5 
experiences and progresses to constructing a convincing 
argument that supports or refutes claims for either explanations 
or solutions about the natural and designed world. 
 Evaluate competing design solutions based on jointly 
developed and agreed-upon design criteria. (MS-ETS1-2)  
 
Disciplinary Core Ideas 
ETS1.A:  Defining and Delimiting Engineering Problems 
 The more precisely a design task’s criteria and constraints can be 
defined, the more likely it is that the designed solution will be 
successful. Specification of constraints includes consideration of 
scientific principles and other relevant knowledge that are likely to 
limit possible solutions. (MS-ETS1-1) 
ETS1.B:  Developing Possible Solutions 
 A solution needs to be tested, and then modified on the basis of 
the test results, in order to improve it. (MS-ETS1-4)  
 There are systematic processes for evaluating solutions with 
respect to how well they meet the criteria and constraints of a 
problem. (MS-ETS1-2), (MS-ETS1-3)  
 Sometimes parts of different solutions can be combined to create a 
solution that is better than any of its predecessors. (MS-ETS1-3)  
 Models of all kinds are important for testing solutions. (MS-ETS1-4) 
ETS1.C:  Optimizing the Design Solution 
 Although one design may not perform the best across all tests, 
identifying the characteristics of the design that performed the best 
in each test can provide useful information for the redesign 
process—that is, some of those characteristics may be incorporated 
into the new design. (MS-ETS1-3) 
 The iterative process of testing the most promising solutions and 
modifying what is proposed on the basis of the test results leads to 
greater refinement and ultimately to an optimal solution. (MS-
ETS1-4) 
 
Crosscutting Concepts 
Influence of Science, Engineering, 
and Technology on Society and the 
Natural World 
 All human activity draws on natural 
resources and has both short and 
long-term consequences, positive as 
well as negative, for the health of 
people and the natural 
environment. (MS-ETS1-1) 
 The uses of technologies and 
limitations on their use are driven 
by individual or societal needs, 
desires, and values; by the findings 
of scientific research; and by 
differences in such factors as 
climate, natural resources, and 
economic conditions. (MS-ETS1-1) 
Connections to MS-ETS1.A: Defining and Delimiting Engineering Problems include:  
     Physical Science: MS-PS3-3 
Connections to MS-ETS1.B: Developing Possible Solutions Problems include:  
     Physical Science: MS-PS1-6, MS-PS3-3, Life Science: MS-LS2-5 
Connections to MS-ETS1.C: Optimizing the Design Solution include:  
     Physical Science: MS-PS1-6 
Articulation of DCIs across grade-bands: 3-5.ETS1.A (MS-ETS1-1),(MS-ETS1-2),(MS-ETS1-3); 3-5.ETS1.B (MS-ETS1-2),(MS-ETS1-3),(MS-ETS1-4); 3-5.ETS1.C (MS-ETS1-1),(MS-
ETS1-2),(MS-ETS1-3),(MS-ETS1-4); HS.ETS1.A (MS-ETS1-1),(MS-ETS1-2); HS.ETS1.B (MS-ETS1-1),(MS-ETS1-2),(MS-ETS1-3),(MS-ETS1-4); HS.ETS1.C (MS-ETS1-3),(MS-ETS1-4) 
Common Core State Standards Connections:  
ELA/Literacy –  
RST.6-8.1   Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of science and technical texts. (MS-ETS1-1),(MS-ETS1-2),(MS-ETS1-3) 
RST.6-8.7  Integrate quantitative or technical information expressed in words in a text with a version of that information expressed visually (e.g., in a flowchart, diagram, 
model, graph, or table). (MS-ETS1-3) 
RST.6-8.9 Compare and contrast the information gained from experiments, simulations, video, or multimedi a sources with that gained from reading a text on the same 
topic. (MS-ETS1-2),(MS-ETS1-3) 
WHST.6-8.7  Conduct short research projects to answer a question (including a self -generated question), drawing on several sources and generating additional related, 
focused questions that allow for multiple avenues of exploration. (MS-ETS1-2) 
WHST.6-8.8  Gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources, using search terms effectively; assess the credibility a nd accuracy of each source; and quote 
or paraphrase the data and conclusions of others while avoiding plagiarism and following a st andard format for citation. (MS-ETS1-1) 
WHST.6-8.9  Draw evidence from informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research. (MS-ETS1-2) 
SL.8.5  Integrate multimedia and visual displays into presentations to clarify information, strengthen claims and evidence, and add interest.  (MS-ETS1-4) 
Mathematics –  
MP.2 Reason abstractly and quantitatively. (MS-ETS1-1),(MS-ETS1-2),(MS-ETS1-3),(MS-ETS1-4) 
7.EE.3 Solve multi-step real-life and mathematical problems posed with positive and negative rational numbers in any form (whole numbers, fractions, and decimals),  
using tools strategically. Apply properties of operations to calculate with numbers in any form; convert between forms as app ropriate; and assess the 
reasonableness of answers using mental computation and estimation strategies.  (MS-ETS1-1),(MS-ETS1-2),(MS-ETS1-3) 
7.SP Develop a probability model and use it to find probabilities of events. Compare probabilities from a model to observe d frequencies; if the agreement is not good, 
explain possible sources of the discrepancy. (MS-ETS1-4) 
 
April 2014
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
1 of 1
September 2017
©2013 Achieve, Inc. All rights reserved.
74 of 103